Experience and advice from hundreds of smallbusiness owners /operators in fourteen countriesby Jonathan T. ScottThe Entrepreneur’s Guide toBuilding a Successful Businessby the author ofThe Sustainable BusinessJonathan T. ScottTaking the First Steps Toward Understanding, Implementingand Managing Sustainability from a Cost/Profit Perspective2ND EDITIONA PRACTITIONER’S GUIDETO ACHIEVING LONG-TERM PROFITABILITYAND COMPETITIVENESSAn excellent referenceowners and operatorsfor small businessThe Entrepreneur’s Guide toBuilding a Successful BusinessBy Jonathan T ScottPublished by:EFMDaisblRue Gachard 88 – Box 31050 Brussels, BelgiumT +32 (0)2 629 08 10F +32 (0)2 629 08 11E info@efmd.orgwww.efmd.orgEFMD is an international not-for-profit association (aisbl)Copyright 2017 by Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD. All rights reserved. The moral rights of the author have been asserted.No part of this work may be reproduced, offered for sale, sold, traded, or utilized in any form by any means, electronic ormechanical, including photocopying, microfilm, and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system with theexpressed written approval of the author and publisher.Cover design: Jebens DesignLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataScott, Jonathan (Jonathan T.)The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business (2nd Edition): with Collective Advice from Seasoned Practitioners/ Jonathan T. ScottIncludes bibliographical references and indexISBN: 978-0-9818-260-1-11. Entrepreneurship – handbooks, manuals, study guides2. Entrepreneurship, small business ownership, starting a business – handbooks, manuals, study guides3. Business - handbooks, manuals, study guides etc. I. Title1Contents10 Part I: Preparation11 1. Do You Have What It Takes?12 Stage I: The Right Attitude12 Stage II: Implementation (Putting Plans into Action)12 Stage III: Diligence (Going the Distance)12 The Four Main Fears of Entrepreneurship15 The Top Ten Myths of Entrepreneurship16 Overcoming Negativity16 Developing a Healthy Definition of Success17 The Other End of the Scale: Overconfidence17 Advice from the Pros18 2. Starting Your New Business: Why, When, and WhereShould You Do It?18 Starting a New Business19 Good Reasons for Starting a New Business19 Poor Reasons for Starting a Business20 When is the Best Time to Start a New Business Venture?20 Where is the Best Place to Start a Business?20 Advice from the Pros22 3. Finding a Good Business Idea26 How Stupid is a Stupid Idea?27 The Need for New Ideas Never Ends28 Advice from the Pros29 4. Setting Up Your New Business: The Options30 Part-Time Businesses30 Full-Time Businesses30 The Start-Up Business30 Buying an Existing Business31 Franchising32 Advice from the Pros33 5. An Introduction to the Importance of BusinessResearch33 Step Number 1: Building a Strong Foundation34 Defining Market Research35 The Objectives of Market Research35 Tools for Conducting Market Research36 Sources of Secondary Data Collection37 Sources of Primary Data Collection39 Don’t Walk Away from the Hard Work and Time Research Demands39 Advice from the Pros40 6. Suggestions for Conducting Business Research40 Conducting External Research42 Making Adjustments42 Conducting Internal Research42 Researching the Cost of Overheads43 SWOT Analysis44 Advice from the Pros2© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business45 7.Choosing a Location45 Questions to Ask When Choosing a Business Location47 Learning about Leases48 Advice from the Pros49 8.Finding a Manufacturer or Supplier…49 Beginning the Search51 Keeping Manufacturers and Suppliers51 Selecting an Overseas Manufacturer or Supplier52 Advice from the Pros53 9.Business Models53 What’s Good for the Goose is not always Good for the Gander53 Sales Volume vs. Profit Margins53 Trying to Get It Right: The Paradox of Business Models54 Profit Margins vs. Sales Volume54 High Prices vs. Low Prices54 Market Share vs. Profitability55 Less Choice vs. More Choice55 Competition vs. Cooperation55 Lean Thinking vs. Business as Usual56 Selling vs. Sales and Service56 Persistence vs. Stubbornness (or Knowing When to Stop and Change)57 There are No Guarantees in Business58 Advice from the Pros59 10. The Thirteen Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail(and How to Prevent Them)59 Inadequate Planning59 Underestimating the Commitment it Takes to Succeed60 Cash Flow Problems61 Poor Management61 Not Understanding the Importance of Customers61 Staffing Problems62 Inflexibility63 Poor Marketing and/or an Inability to Sell63 Not Enough Capital63 Pricing Problems64 Lack of a Competitive Edge64 Going It Alone64 Growing too Fast65 Advice from the Pros66 Part II: Laying the Foundation67 11. Writing a Business Plan67 Why Write a Business Plan?67 The Essentials of Good Planning68 A Sample Business Plan Layout69 The Most Common Mistakes Made When Writing a Business Plan69 Additional Tips for Writing a Solid Business Plan70 Advice from the Pros70 Examples of Numerical Data73 12. Finding Finance73 Sources of Finance© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.org3Contents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business73 Banks74 Corporate Venturing74 Equipment Loans74 Crowdfunding74 Family and Friends74 Government Help75 Grants75 Issuing Shares75 Small Business Administration Loans75 Soft Loans75 Trade Credit75 Venture Capitalists76 Mixing up the Options76 Advice from the Pros77 13. A Brief Look at Bookkeeping, Numbers, Taxes,and Formulas77 The Importance of Numbers78 Audits78 Balance Sheets78 Basic Bookkeeping79 Break-Even Point79 Cash Register Sales79 Cost of Goods Sold80 Inventory80 Ledger Books80 Monthly Net Profit81 Profits81 Taxes81 Advice from the Pros82 14. Naming Your Business (or Product) and Other TasksBefore Getting Started82 Naming the Business (or Product)83 Choosing a Logo83 Obtaining a Business Mailing Address and Phone Number83 Opening a Separate Bank Account83 Setting Up a Website84 Ordering Business Cards and Stationary84 Establishing a Separate Work Space and Work Time85 Insurance85 Advice from the Pros86 15. Making Your Business Legal86 The Sole Proprietorship (or Sole Trader)87 Partnerships87 Limited Liability Companies88 Incorporation89 Subchapter S Corporations89 Staying Legal (or, Keeping Abreast of the Law)90 Advice from the Pros91 16. Protecting Your Business with Copyrights,Trademarks, Patents, and UPC Codes91 Copyright4© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business92 Trademarks92 Patents92 Three Do’s and Don’ts Regarding Patents93 Playing It Safe93 Obtaining a UPC Number and Bar Code for a Product94 Advice from the Pros95 17. Re-Energizing95 Feeling Overwhelmed and Its Relation to Time Management96 The Warning Signs of Stress and/or Overwork97 Suggestions for Eliminating Stress98 Advice from the Pros99 18. Announcing the Existence of Your Business99 Preparing to Advertise100 Getting the Word Out101 Grand Openings102 Advice from the Pros103 19. A Front-Line Marketing and Promotion Checklist103 In-House Marketing103 Point-of-Sale Areas103 In-Store Promotion104 In-Store Advertising104 Internal Public Relations104 Out-of-House Marketing104 Unique Selling Points104 Community Relations105 Direct Sales Campaigns105 Indirect Sales Campaigns105 Suggestions for Ensuring that Marketing Attempts Obtain Results106 Advice from the Pros108 20. Developing Internal and External Customers109 Evaluating Customers and Employees109 Establishing a Customer Data Base110 Developing and Enhancing Employees (or, Training Employees)111 Monitoring Employees (Job Evaluations)111 Dealing with Consistently Poor Performance111 Dealing with Consistently Poor Performance111 Work evaluations should avoid112 Nothing Recedes Like Success112 Advice from the Pros113 Part III: Business & Managerial Basics114 21. Management115 The Two Choices of Management115 The Two Choices of Management: A Case Study116 The Biggest Obstacle of All: Ego117 Common Management Styles117 So Which Style is Best… And When Should it Be Used?117 Management is about Doing What is Best for the Business118 One Last Time: Management is about Service118 Advice from the Pros120 22. Understanding the Importance of Customers5© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business120 Same Theme, Different Story121 Getting Back to Basics121 Business 101121 Lip Service vs. Customer Service122 How Important are Personalized Customer Relationships?122 Elementary Customer Mathematics (or, Penny Wise and Pound Foolish)122 What is Good Customer Service?123 What Do Customers Want?123 Two Examples of Good Customer Service123 The Ten Commandments of Business Success124 The Customer Paradox (or, Customer Wants vs. Customer Needs)124 Dealing with Difficult Customers125 Thinking in the Long Term125 The Final Word125 Advice from the Pros126 23. The Basic Levels of Every Product126 How Well Do You Know Your Product?127 Which Product Level Attracts the Most Customers?128 What to Do When a Major Competitor Moves Into Town128 Which Product Element Results in the Most Sales?129 Sometimes What Customers Want is Just So Simple129 Once Again129 Advice from the Pros131 24. The Importance of Marketing131 A Definition of Marketing131 The Marketing Mix132 The Promotion Mix133 Product Life-Cycle133 Increasing a Product’s Life133 Don’t Go It Alone134 Marketing Doesn’t Require Fancy Schemes or Costly Expenses134 The False Illusion Inherent in ‘Digital’135 Advice from the Pros136 25. Competitive Advantage Strategy136 Types of Strategies137 Sometimes a Good Strategy is so Obvious it’s Difficult to See137 Small Business Advantages138 Which Strategy is Best?138 The Ten Commandments of Business Strategy138 Matching Strategy to the Business138 Advice from the Pros140 26. Quality140 W. Edwards Deming’s Points for Achieving Quality141 Condensing the Master141 The Eight Dimensions of Quality142 Benchmarking142 Putting Quality into Action143 The Mother of All Battles143 Advice from the Pros144 27. Pricing144 Facts about Pricing6© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business144 Common Mistakes in Pricing145 Starting the Pricing Process145 Internal and External Factors that Affect Pricing146 Pricing in Action147 Summing up Pricing148 Advice from the Pros149 28. Selling149 The Art and Science of Selling149 Selling 101: Understanding Customer Motivation149 Doing Your Homework (or, Knowing Where Your Customers Are)150 What Every Good Salesperson Learns150 Two Basic Sales Approaches151 Sales Calls151 The Do’s of Making a Sales Call152 The Don’ts of Making a Sales Call152 Advice from the Pros154 29. Closing a Sale154 When the Customer has an Objection155 When the Customer Displays Buying Signals155 When the Customer Says No156 When the Customer Says Yes156 Issues that Should be Pondered Towards the Close of a Sale156 Closing the Sale156 What to Do When the Customer Balks157 Advice from the Pros158 30. Getting the Most from Employees158 Motivating Employees: Four Separate Theories158 Maslow’s Pyramid158 McClelland’s Theory of Three Essential Motivations159 Herzberg’s Two-Factor Theory159 Alderfer’s Existence-Related-Growth Theory159 Which Theory is Best?160 Getting to the Top of the Pyramid160 Taking the Fear out of Delegation161 Making Delegation Work for You162 Taking the Next Step162 Employee Empowerment162 Empowerment in Action163 Making Empowerment Work for You163 Another Example of Empowerment in Action163 For managers, empowerment involves:164 The Importance of Feedback164 Reprimands and Punishment165 Modifying Unacceptable Behavior165 The End Desire166 Advice from the Pros167 31. Ethics and Social Responsibility167 An Introduction to Social Responsibility167 Doing Good is Good for Business168 More Examples of Social Responsibility Leading to Increased Profits169 Learning Right from Wrong7© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContents — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business169 Recognized Reasons for Behaving Ethically169 Trying to Rationalize Unethical Behavior170 How to Make an Ethical Decision170 An Overall Ethical Litmus Test170 The Bottom Line170 Advice from the Pros172 Part IV: Strengthening and Growing173 32. Cooperative Networking173 Cooperating Businesses174 Getting over the Hurdle174 What Type of Business Prospers Most174 Getting Started175 Advantages and Disadvantages of Business Networks175 The Rules of Cooperative Networking176 Advice from the Pros177 33. Manufacturing New Products and Services(and Selling Them)177 Manufacturing a New Product178 Product Accessibility (Getting the Word Out): Push vs. Pull Strategies178 For Retailers: Choosing the Best Products to Sell179 Stocking New Products: Determining if a Good Decision has been Made180 Advice from the Pros181 34. Expanding into Foreign Markets181 Why Go International?182 Before Going Abroad182 Classifying Your Product182 Getting Help182 Establishing Entry Mode183 Exporting183 Joint-Venturing184 Direct Investment184 Developing an Overseas Strategic Marketing Plan185 Advice from the Pros186 35. Sustainability: The New Frontier186 Population Increases186 Population Increases186 Sustainability and the Circular Economy188 Agricultural Woes188 Disease, Toxins, and Health Problems189 Economic Troubles189 Opportunities191 For More Information194 36. Putting It All Together194 Two Analogies195 The Five Components of A Successful Business195 Recap: Advice from the Pros199 Bibliography209 Index8© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDon’t be fooled by the term ‘small-to-midsize enterprise’. Almost every business enterprise beginssmall (i.e.: employing one to five people). Indeed, it is important to note that 90% of the world’ssmall-to-midsize enterprises (SME’s) hire a similar percentage of the world’s working population;which means that much of the world’s economy is carried on the back of small-to-midsize businesses.This is why, year after year, the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD, 2015)confidently states that SME’s are, and will continue to be, a main source of new and existing jobsworldwide.Additionally, SME’s tend to be more innovative in knowledge-intensive services and newtechnologies and they make-up the bulk of the tourism trade (the world’s largest industry) byconstituting up to 97% of the world’s total number of leisure enterprises. It is therefore hardlysurprising that the economic strength of almost every nation rests firmly on the health of its small-tomidsize businesses.Although definitions vary, firms that hire one to ten people are often classified as micro-businesses,those that employ up to 50 people are known as small businesses, and the ones that grow to employ100-200 individuals are usually called mid-sized.Unfortunately, despite their economic impact, SME’s are all-too-often over-looked by academiabecause (understandably) there’s little or no money in researching small firms that don’t, and can’t,provide multimillion-dollar donations and research grants. It’s simply more profitable and prestigiousfor cash-hungry business schools to study large corporations as well as high-stake ‘unicorn’ venturesand other expensive, attention-generating startups... which brings us to why this book is given awayfor free and what it’s designed to do.Because most people will experience, or can expect to experience, a period of self-employment atsome point in their lives before they retire, and because small-to-midsize businesses are so vital tolocal, regional and world-wide economic prosperity, we believe that everyone who wants to engage inpersonal growth through business ownership should have access to basic, practical insight from askills-building, application perspective. This includes the inexperienced and experienced, as well as theunemployed and the underemployed. The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business istherefore made available as a free download by EFMD as part of its Sustainable Business portfolio ofsupplemental business education and training materials.The first edition of The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business (published in 2009) wasthe culmination of a four-year study that examined numerous success and failure factors involved inrunning a small business. This new updated second edition enriches the original text with sixadditional months of research, writing, and amendments. Most of the businesses that were examinedemploy less than 12 people and are located in fourteen countries (Australia, Belarus, Belgium, Canada,Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russia, South Africa, the UnitedKingdom, and the United States). Perimeters were set by ensuring that each enterprise had been inbusiness for at least five years. All in all, entrepreneurs in 224 businesses gave over 2,000 responses to22 written questions. Over 150 additional businesses were studied via secondary sources. Questionsincluded: What makes your business thrive?, What contributed to the downfall of your previous business (ifyou had one)?, and What do you think goes on in the businesses of your rivals? (i.e.: Why do you think you’redoing better than your competitors?). Countless follow up questions and scores of interviews ensued.The patterns that emerged became the crux of this book.IntroductionNever have so many people had so much access toso much knowledge and yet have been so resistantto learning anything.Tom Nichols9© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.org To avoid technical jargon, professorial language, and the often solipsistic research inherent inacademic business books, we endeavoured to keep the information readable, concise, necessary andpractitioner-oriented. This was done by asking business students and business practitioners across theglobe to list the styles and features that they admire most in business texts as well as what theywanted to see in this one. Suggestions poured in from 22 countries (Belarus, Canada, China,Denmark, England, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Nigeria,Peru, Russia, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, the United States, and Vietnam). All in all, over 563replies were received – and here’s what was most often said:- the text should be written with solid authenticity (i.e.: with the views of practitioners),- there should be clearly labeled chapter and paragraph headings,- the text should consist of brief explanations and easy-to-understand diagrams,- only simple, clear, straightforward, and concise language and prose (no academic language)should be used,- a balance between theory and practice (with an emphasis on solutions) should be maintained,- a ‘refresher’ section should be included that explains business and managerial basics,- there should be a proliferation of true-life case studies and interesting stories to highlight eachtopic,- as a whole, the style should reflect a great deal of ‘positive energy’ and be written in amotivational style. In effect, The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business was written with the help ofentrepreneurs for entrepreneurs. Some of the information presented goes back over 100-years(entrepreneurs absolutely love historical business stories) and some of the advice may seemcontradictory, but this is to be expected when hundreds of practitioners give their input. At the end ofthe day, The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business is meant to:- be helpful, enabling, and informative – to promote business success, whet the appetite ofstudents and practitioners and provide further interest in the study of business andentrepreneurship,- supplement other books on business and entrepreneurship (because the information presentedherein is certainly not definitive),- approach the study of entrepreneurship and business development in a practical andunderstandable manner, and,- avoid unreadable prose, unverifiable trends, and overly theoretical material.We hope we have succeeded.Note: If your organization or institute would like to voluntarily translate this book into anotherlanguage for the purpose of enabling economic growth in your country or region, please contactjtscott@cipsfoundation.com to obtain permission. In addition to other benefits, we allow translatorsto sell printed copies of their translations and keep at least 95% of the proceeds (a complete digitalcopy of all translations, however, must be sent to EFMD so that we can freely distribute it). During thetranslation process, we encourage knowledgeable contributors to add local/national case studies andother regional information to enhance and enrich the text.Introduction — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business10© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPART IPREPARATION11© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIt’s nine-thirty on a Friday night and I’m staring at 700 brochures I spent the last six weeksdesigning and writing. Realistically I need 2,000 more, but I don’t want to think about that right now.The envelopes they will be stuffed into are strewn over a nearby couch. The names and addresses ofthe brochure destinations were obtained from countless hours of Internet and library searchesconducted over the course of four months. As I write this, two thoughts come to mind: I cannotremember the last time I had a day off and I have no idea if this direct-mail marketing campaign willpay off. Although the research I did suggests that the potential customers I’m targeting do respond tothis approach (see Chapters 5 and 6), everything I send out may very well be thrown into the garbageby the recipient. Equally as distressing is that after going over the numbers dozens of times I don’twant to consider, yet again, how much this is costing me. So instead I plow on. Welcome to the worldof entrepreneurship, where there is no guarantee that the starter pistol will ever go off, where there isnever a finish line – and where just starting the process is a full-time job.Here’s the bit that’s most difficult to articulate: and therein lies the beauty in all of this. AsPresident John F. Kennedy once said, we don’t choose to go to the moon because it’s easy - we gobecause it’s hard. So it is with entrepreneurship. Starting (and running) a commercial enterpriserequires developing new skills, seizing the initiative, rising while others sleep, working evenings andweekends and holidays, and taking educated risks. In addition, unique and sometimes conflictingqualities and character traits - often considered inappropriate in refined social settings - are alsorequired, such as a rabid hatred of losing and a bit of obsessive behavior. Simply put, being goaloriented and having a bit of business talent aren’t enough on their own because, as the saying goes,talent without discipline is a like an octopus on roller-skates. Knowing how to apply your strengths,weaknesses, and differences in an appropriate context is also crucial – as is having the guts to dothings never before attempted even though you’re a bit reticent or afraid. The bottom line is that mostbusiness success is not dependent on luck - unless luck is defined as preparation meeting opportunity(according to some surveys, succeeding as an entrepreneur often means toiling 65 to 85 hours a weekor more [also, see the chart on page 119, How Small Business Owners/Managers Spend Their Time]).But first things first. Whether you want to start an enterprise from scratch or try something new inan existing organization, before the hard work and risk-taking commence you must first be ready andwilling to face the unknown with the best that humanity has to offer – the human spirit. If you don’tfire yourself up and use your enthusiasm to make thorough preparations there’s a good chance thatyour proposed business project will be sunk before it begins. The following page reveals many of thequalities and attributes that successful entrepreneurs often possess, but paradoxically do not alwaysneed to have.Chapter 1Do You Have What It Takes?‘The man who wins is the man who works,Who neither labor nor trouble shirks;Who uses his head, his hands, his eyes –The man who wins is the man who tries.’Conrad Hilton12© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessStage I: The Right AttitudeEvery endeavor, large or small, benefits from a proper mind-set. As Henry Ford once said, whetheryou believe you can, or whether you believe you can’t, you’re absolutely right. In the business world,this means having or developing above-average levels of the following before beginning a businessendeavor:- Drive and determination. Including initiative, high energy levels, and a hearty appetite forachievement.- Ambition. Harboring a fierce desire to succeed as well as forming a substantial, realistic, andpersonal definition of exactly what success is.- Intelligence. The desire and aptitude to gather, interpret, and prioritize information.- Commercial intellect. The motivation and know-how to scan business environments forweaknesses, threats, and opportunities.- Confidence. The courage to be decisive and assured (not arrogant), with your abilities.- Curiosity. An innate interest in the world and how it works.- The will to win. The determination to come out on top rather than just participate. (For example,consider the thousands of entrants that enter big city marathons. Only a dozen or so can expectto win. Most are happy to just finish the course. In business, you must enter to win.)Stage II: Implementation (Putting Plans into Action)Winning as an entrepreneur is based on being a doer, not a dreamer. This means having the guts toleave the comfort of familiar surroundings and march off into the unknown with a well-honed ideaand a keen sense of adventure. Prerequisites for these attributes include:- Communication skills. The aptitude to state what is needed clearly and concisely.- Motivation. A willingness to work long hours whether you feel like it or not.- Self-discipline. The ability to rein-in temptation or excess.- Persuasiveness. The ability to convince others and inspire them to do your bidding.- Speed and Agility. The ability to respond intelligently to situations both rapidly and effectively.Stage III: Diligence (Going the Distance)Developing the fortitude and determination to stay on track is probably the most difficult of allentrepreneurial abilities. Launching and running a business is time-consuming, life-consuming, andfull of distractions and setbacks. Surviving the process with grace requires:- Resilience. The capacity to learn from mistakes, brush off adversity and pull yourself togetherafter suffering through the inevitable losses that running a business involves.- Perseverance. Steadfastness and consistency (not stubbornness) with goals.- Humility. Maintaining a genuine conviction to serve others.- Reliability. Being responsible, accountable, and available.- Temperament. Keeping a sense of calm, balance, and proportion no matter what happens.- Endurance. The ability to bear the ups and downs of a working day with patience and fortitude– and come back for more.- Flexibility. Greeting the forces of change and being willing to adapt.- Understanding. Accepting that people are different and being able to empathize with them.The Four Main Fears of EntrepreneurshipObviously, the number of qualities and attributes needed to succeed in business is quite extensive.So does that mean that an entrepreneur needs to be a superhero to triumph in the business world?13© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAbsolutely not. Few people are born with all the marvelous abilities that are needed to succeed in life.Yet successful business owners appear to get around their shortcomings by learning as they go,admitting their frailties, and shoring up their weaknesses – a process that helps overcome their fears.Fear is a common emotion that often manifests itself into excuses, procrastination, or inaction.Indeed, many psychologists say that fear is the root cause of most human problems. Listed below arefour of the most common fears associated with starting a business.1. Age. Exactly what age is too old or too young to run a business? Years ago, the owner of asporting goods store in the USA celebrated his 100th birthday (he opened his enterprise in1933). He was only working four hours a day, but he was still working, and introducing newproducts, and beating his competitors. Colonel Sanders, the man who invented Kentucky FriedChicken, began selling his secret formula to franchisees at the age of 64. Ray Kroc, a malt-shakemachine salesman from Illinois, bought four California hamburger restaurants when he was 52years old and re-tooled them into the McDonald’s empire. And so it goes as the number ofentrepreneurs over the age of 50 is expected to rise dramatically according to industry experts.At the other end of the scale, Michael Dell, the founder of Dell Computer, began his firstbusiness at the age of 13. By the time he turned 19, the computer parts business he ran outof his college dorm room was grossing $80,000 per month. Not to be outdone, Bill Gatesstarted Microsoft at the tender age of 19. And today, millennials are starting businesses atalmost twice the rate of their older peers (Petrilla 2016). The overall message is that age is nota determinant factor when it comes to starting and running a business. Attitude, courage,and action are far more important.2. Lack of Money. There’s no doubt that having lots of capital makes starting a business somewhateasier. Yet a sizeable number of successful practitioners steadfastly believe that having abetter-than-average amount of start-up capital has little to do with overall success. Indeed, quitea few hard-nosed entrepreneurs claim that it’s actually beneficial to create a business with aslittle money as possible. Their belief is that too many individuals, when starting with a pile ofcash, waste it on things they don’t need – an office, a secretary, expensive computer equipment,and so on. On the other hand, having a small amount of startup cash teaches frugality andefficiency. If you’re not convinced by this argument consider the hundreds of thousands of folksaround the world who began their businesses with little more than chump change and a burningdesire to see their idea bear fruit. For example, Disney, Apple, Hewlett Packard, and the Mattel toycompany, all began life in garages. Seattle based teenager Jim Casey founded UPS with $100,two bicycles, one telephone and six employees. The Nike Corporation began in 1964 when PhilKnight and Bill Bowerman each invested $300 in a shipment of athletic shoes and sold them outof a car at track meets. Eighteen-year-old Joyce C. Hall started the Hallmark greeting cardcompany with an armful of postcards he kept in two shoeboxes. Thomas Monaghan, who spenthis early life in and out of orphanages and foster homes (and was kicked out of everythingafterward from a Catholic seminary to the Marine Corps) started Dominos Pizza by turning abankrupt pizza parlor - half of which he traded for his Volkswagen Beetle - into the USA’snumber one pizza delivery service. And the Marriott Hotel chain began its life as a humble rootbeer stand in 1927. Simply put (as the old saying goes), success in business is usually based on10% capital and 90% guts. Stated another way, people that can’t make money without moneyusually won’t make money with money. According to successful business practitioners, mindpower, diligence, and passion are far more influential.14© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business3. Fear of Rejection. Most successful business owners readily admit that the path to prosperity ispaved with rejection. Indeed, many hard-core entrepreneurs state quite openly that they oftenfail twice as much as others. So why do they end up succeeding? Because they try more. Insteadof giving up, successful business owners learn to deal with failure and adversity and then moveon. Take for example Bernard Marcus and Arthur Blank who, in 1978, joined forces withco-worker Ronald Brill and founded Home Depot – after all three men had lost their jobs in acorporate buyout. Or consider King C. Gillette, the inventor of the safety razor, who suffered sixyears of humiliating rejection from companies, investors, and toolmakers while they laughed outloud at his innovative new product. When King eventually decided to produce his inventionhimself, sales rose at a rate of 1,000% annually! The story of Ewing Kauffman provides anothergood example of how successful entrepreneurs rebound from rejection. Shortly after WWII,Kauffman was fired from his job as a salesman because his commissions exceeded thepresident’s salary at the company where he worked. Undaunted, he descended into hisbasement and began making calcium pills from oyster shells. Years later, after capturing fortypercent of the $100-million calcium supplement market, he sold his company to Dow Chemicalfor a fortune.Such bounce-back stories are not the stuff of old fashioned motivational stories. Indeed,millennials seem to be more prone than their elders to learn from failure, brush it off, andthen parlay it into victory (Petrilla, 2016). The lesson here is that winning often lies in themind. Success to those with the perseverance to stay in the game is usually nothing morethan failure turned inside out.4. Lack of Education or Experience. There is evidence that suggests a college education does notguarantee business success. Indeed, it sometimes appears otherwise. Steven Jobs and StephenWozniak, for example, founded Apple Computer after dropping out of college. Neither one ofthem had any entrepreneurial experience. Michael Dell, the multi-millionaire founder of DellComputer, is also a college dropout. The same goes for Ted Waitt, who, after quitting school,underwent nine months of on-the-job training at a computer company only to leave and startGateway 2000. Ten years later, his salary exceeded $500,000 per annum. John Bond, formerchairman of HSBC (one of the world’s largest banks), also never went to university.Still not convinced? Then consider the story of Ian Leopold, whose college professor failedhim because of the unrealistic business plan he submitted in class. By sticking to his instincts,Leopold turned a $48 investment into $4-million in ten years with the very same plan(writing university guidebooks).And in the last years of her life, multimillionaire Anita Roddick, founder of The Body Shop,advised entrepreneurs to ‘stay away from business schools’. Her belief was that businessschools focus too much on the financial side of business and ignore the all-important humanelement.Of course this does not mean that education and experience are not needed to start and run abusiness. The following statement was relayed to me several years ago by a successfulentrepreneur in France: ‘I didn’t learn any ground-breaking secrets in business school,’ he said.‘Most of what I’ve learned I experienced on the job. Yet one thing I’ve noticed over the yearsis that no matter where business studies are taught, the folks who need this information themost are usually nowhere to be found.’ His point is that there’s no shame in not knowingeverything there is to know about running a business. There is only shame in not admitting itand ignoring the need to improve.15© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessThe Top 10 Myths of EntrepreneurshipOf course fear isn’t the only obstacle that stands in the way of entrepreneurs. Countless myths alsoblock the first crucial steps. Following is what Scott Shane, professor of entrepreneurship at CaseWestern University, says are the ten greatest misconceptions of entrepreneurship.1. A lot of money is needed to finance a start-up. Contrary to what most people believe, 10-years ago atypical start-up in the USA required about $25,000 to begin. How is it possible to start abusiness with such a small amount of money? Successful entrepreneurs do whatever they can tokeep costs low. They borrow equipment instead of paying for it. They rent instead of buying.And they turn fixed costs into variable costs by doing things such as paying their employeescommission instead of salaries.2. Venture Capitalists are a good source for start-up money. Not unless the business is in the computeror biotech industries. In the USA, venture capitalists only fund around 3,000 companies everyyear (one-third of which are in the start-up stage) with around 81% of all venture capital dollarsgoing toward businesses that deal in computer hardware (and software), semiconductors,communication, and biotechnology. In fact, the odds that a start-up will receive money from aventure capitalist are about one in 4,000 (which is worse than the odds of dying from a fall whiletaking a shower).3. Most business angels (i.e.: a person who enjoys giving money to someone else so that he or shecan start a business) are rich. If rich means being a person with more than $1-million, or anannual income of $200,000 to $300,000, then the answer is no. Almost three-quarters of thepeople that provide capital to fund someone else’s start-up don’t meet SEC accreditationrequirements. On the contrary, 32% have an income of $40,000 a year or less and 17% havenegative net worth.4. Start-ups can’t be financed with debt. Actually, debt is more common than equity. According tothe Federal Reserve Survey of Small Business Finances, 53% of finances for new businesses that aretwo years old or younger come from borrowed money; 47% comes from equity.5. Banks don’t lend money to start-ups. According to Federal Reserve data, banks account for 16% ofall the financing provided to companies that are two years old or younger. This is 3% higher thanthe next highest source – trade creditors – and a bit higher than the most common capitalsources everyone talks about: friends, family, business angels, venture capitalists, strategicinvestors, and government agencies.6. Most entrepreneurs start their businesses in attractive industries. Unfortunately, the opposite istrue. Most entrepreneurs head straight for the worst industries when contemplating a start-up.For example, in the United States the correlation between the number of entrepreneurs startingbusinesses in an industry and the number of companies failing in the same industry is 0.77. Putanother way, this means that most entrepreneurs choose industries in which they’re most likelyto fail.7. The growth of a start-up requires more entrepreneurial talent than the type of business chosen. Perhapsnot surprisingly, the industry in which an entrepreneur chooses to start his or her company hasan enormous influence on its growth. Between the years 1996-2006, around 4.2% of allstart-ups in the computer and office equipment industry made the Inc 500 list of the fastestgrowing private companies in the USA. The percentage of growing companies in the hotel andmotel industry averaged around 0.005. Eating and drinking establishments averaged 0.007%.This means that the odds of making the Inc 500 list were 840 times greater for a computercompany rather than a hotel.8. Most entrepreneurs are financially successful. That depends on your definition of success. Whileit’s true that small businesses are responsible for the majority of wealth in most countries, thewealth these businesses create is unevenly distributed and it spreads rather thinly. For example,16© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthe typical profit for an owner-managed business is $39,000 per year and only the top 10% ofentrepreneurs earn more money than their employees. Put another way, the typicalentrepreneur almost always earns less money than he or she would earn working for someoneelse.9. A large number of start-ups achieve the sales growth projections that equity investors are looking for.Absolutely not. Of the 590,000 or so new businesses founded in the USA every year less than200 reach the $100-million in sales in six years that most venture capitalists require. Around500 businesses reach the $50-million in sales that top-end business angels are seeking, and onlyabout 9,500 companies reach a target of $5-million in the same six year period.10. Starting a business is easy. It’s unclear why anyone would believe this to be true – particularlywhen one takes into account that the majority of people who start a business end up failing. Inthe USA, for example, seven years after beginning the start-up process, only one-third ofsuccessful entrepreneurs can boast about having a positive cash flow greater than their salaryand expenses for more than three consecutive months. (Shane, 2010)Overcoming NegativityPerhaps now it’s easy to understand why so many people forgo the notion of starting their ownbusiness and choose to work for someone else instead. Simply put, building a business is hard workand the odds of succeeding are harsh. That being said, if starting a business seems beyond your reachbecause the people surrounding you - not the facts - are filling your head with negative thoughts, thefollowing advice from experienced business practitioners may be worth considering:- as a rule most people in life will tell you what you cannot do rather than what you can do.- just because someone doesn’t believe in you doesn’t mean you can’t succeed.- no one can make you feel inferior without your consent.- your past does not have to contaminate your future.- where you come from isn’t important, it’s where you’re going that counts.- if you focus on what you want, instead of what others deny you, you’ll have a much greaterchance of succeeding.- fear of the unknown (and the known) can be controlled once it’s admitted.Developing a Healthy Definition of SuccessStill afraid of taking a risk and stepping out into the unknown? You’re not alone. It’s notuncommon for even experienced entrepreneurs to measure themselves against unreasonablestandards and see themselves falling short. For example, a successful entrepreneur in the UK onceadmitted to me that he thought his business was a failure. This was unusual because there was nodoubt in my mind (or anyone else’s) that he was doing quite well.‘How long have you been in business?’ I asked.‘Sixteen years,’ he replied.‘And how many similar businesses around here have come and gone during that time?’‘Seven,’ he answered.‘What about your salary? Do you make a good living?’‘Oh yes,’ he replied. ‘I’ve got a nice car, I live in one of the better parts of town, and I usuallytake two vacations a year.’‘Tell me about your employees. Do they leave every few months or do they stay with you?’‘All of them have been with me for years.’‘I’m sorry,’ I said, ‘maybe I’m missing something. Where do you think you’re going wrong?’17© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDo You Have What It Takes? — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessHe got the point. He was confusing his desire to do better with failure. Like so many people he sawother entrepreneurs who had more of something than he did and he immediately assumed that hewas losing. The message? Be reasonable with your expectations and learn to view your business goalsas a staircase rather than a one-chance shot to the moon. This doesn’t mean settling for less, it meansbeing realistic and progressive when it comes to your aspirations. As one entrepreneur I interviewedput it, ‘Tell your readers that the fear and insecurity of running a business never ends. Indeed, thevery concept of entrepreneurship involves overcoming the daily nagging dread that even after servinga satisfied customer we are, in effect, unemployed until the next customer can be secured. It’s justsomething we entrepreneurs have to learn to live with.’The Other End of the Scale: OverconfidenceWilbur Wright, the co-inventor of the airplane, once wrote to his father, when flying, I have learnedthat carelessness and overconfidence are far more dangerous than deliberately accepted risks. Put anotherway, the inventor of one of the world’s most useful devices firmly believed that a little fear is a goodthing. His contention is that fear keeps one in check. ‘Overconfidence can lead to misjudgment,disregard, or the ignoring of good ideas and advice,’ says psychologist Amanda Druckerman. She goeson to say that people who believe that they’re superior to everyone else (which is partly what definesoverconfidence) are often incompetent and self-deceptive, which opens the door to missing out onopportunities.Think about Druckerman’s words - and those of Wilbur Wright - when contemplating the oftreported line that the majority of the world’s business ventures involve little more than: (1)manufacturing a product, (2) providing a service, or, (3) distributing or selling a service or product.Advice from the ProsBy now it should be apparent that starting a business is an eclectic, all-or-nothing endeavor filledwith misconception, contradictions, joy, defeats, and advice (both wanted and unwanted). With thatin mind, this chapter has been concluded (as has every chapter) with the wisdom of entrepreneurs,many of whom assisted in the writing of this book with their hard-won advice.- In business, as in life, know that you cannot change what you tolerate.- Be honest as to what you want and need.- Accept the fact that some things in life cannot be taught, they can only be learned.- Remember that fear is a gift. It is nature’s way of keeping you alert.- Think of fear as an acronym: False Evidence Appearing Real.- Make a list of what you are afraid of (it’s not so frightening now, is it?).- Find out if others have experienced similar fears and what they did to overcome them.- Tear up the list you wrote above.- Know that there is no trust or safety where there are unanswered questions.- Map out the direction you wish to take by writing down what needs to be done.- Start moving toward your goal by gathering as much related information as you can andadapting it to fit your prospective customers, your region, and the business-structure you wouldlike to begin. You have nothing to lose by educating yourself.- To an entrepreneur, every day is a crisis (Philip Knight, founder of Nike)18© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNot long ago, a medical researcher in London spent an afternoon visiting an art gallery. One of themore intriguing displays he saw used magnets to move colored metal particles inside glass tubes.Another display used the repelling force of a giant magnet to levitate a series of smaller magnets.Sometime later he inexplicably thought of these exhibits, which led him to the belief that it just mightbe possible to use magnets to push and pull ionized cancer medications directly into tumors. As aresult, a new field of medicine was born.Just as with science, business also has the same ability to merge what may appear to be twoseemingly unrelated fields that lead to something completely new. Note, however, that the researcherin the example above would not have come up with his groundbreaking idea if he had not firstdiscovered a field of interest that excited him and if he had declined to take an interest in the worldaround him. It’s not much different for those wishing to start a new business. Prospectiveentrepreneurs should start with an interest or passion in a field, area, or product and explore thepurpose and goals behind why they want to make a major change in their life. This type of honestyand insight often proves invaluable in ensuring that the rationale behind a proposed business is valid.Starting a New BusinessPopular opinion suggests that owning a business involves working flexible hours, not beingbeholden to anyone, having the ability to make independent decisions, and, in effect, being completelyon one’s own. Equally as ubiquitous is the belief that because life has not quite turned out the way itwas envisioned, entrepreneurship is as good an instigator of change as any to chart a new course tosuccess. Unfortunately, in both these cases, reality can be quite different from what is believed.What is needed to be successful in business? According to experienced entrepreneurs, apart from asound idea and a combination of good reasons, one must desire to set out into the unknown with theheart of an explorer and the mind of a business contractor. In addition, it must be understood that ajourney laden with risk, hard work, sacrifice, and occasional setbacks, is what lies ahead.If this sounds somewhat harsh, consider the fact that in some cases up to 90% of new enterprisesgo out of business within the first three to five years of operation. Traditionally, it was usuallyassumed that many startups go bust due to a lack of research and prepararion, poor business practicesor unforeseen economic influences. Yet a growing number of researchers think that a large number ofbusinesses ‘fail’ because their overworked owners decided that the rewards are simply not worth theeffort – so the plug is deliberately pulled.Chapter 2Starting Your Business:Why, When, and WhereShould You Do It?‘Be original… unless you want to get very rich,very fast – then copy like crazy.’Dan S. Kennedy19© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgStarting Your Business: Why, When, and Where Should You Do It — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessGood Reasons for Thinking About Starting a BusinessBecause starting-up a business can be difficult, it’s a good idea for a beginner to have several goodreasons as to why he or she would like to become an entrepreneur. The most common of these are:- A desire to be one’s own boss and handle more responsibility.- A love of difficult challenges.- The seeking of career independence as well as more control over life and its direction.- A major ‘life change’ has occurred (i.e.: divorce, disability, job loss, pregnancy, retirement…).- The entrepreneur has invented, developed, or innovated a new product or service.- A current job is going nowhere.- Money has suddenly become available (i.e.: an inheritance, the lottery, the selling of assets…).- An opportunity has made itself known (i.e.: a local business is up for sale; a group of peoplewhose needs are not being met has been spotted; or a product people would pay for has beendiscovered).Poor Reasons for Starting a BusinessFollowing is a list of poor reasons for starting a business. Experienced professionals consider theseto be poor motivators because, on their own, they’re usually not enough to sustain long-termcommitment.- Desperation. Make no mistake, desperation is a powerful motivational stimulus. Yet it can alsolead to poor judgment, rash decisions, and a dangerous leap into untested waters.- There is nothing else to do. Feeling that no other options are available shows a lack of commitmentand passion – two essential elements that comprise successful entrepreneurship.- There is lots of money to be made. This is a pipe dream, and it’s often fueled by media stories thathighlight app/software developers (or others) who struck it rich ‘overnight’. However,entrepreneurs must be realistic with their expectations and know the difference between makinga one-time-only profit, making a living, and daydreaming. The vast majority of successfulentrepreneurs make a living, not a fortune.- Owning a business will make life easier. Unfortunately, having a business usually increases one’sresponsibilities. That doesn’t translate into making life easier.- The entrepreneur can’t work with others. If a wannabe entrepreneur can’t work with other peoplethen he or she is going to have countless problems dealing with customers, bankers, a landlord,suppliers, local or federal agencies, a parent company (if the entrepreneur is involved in afranchise) and the many other people who are often both directly and indirectly involved inprivate enterprise.- Owning a business will provide more free time. Running a business is time consuming and lifeconsuming. Every entrepreneur interviewed for this book stated that he or she worked longerand harder running their own business than they ever did working for someone else (see thetime schedule chart on page 119, How Small Business Owners/Managers Spend Their Time).20© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgStarting Your Business: Why, When, and Where Should You Do It — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessWhen is the Best Time to Start a New Business Venture?Some enthusiasts claim that there is no better time than now to own and run a business. It may bemore prudent, however, for potential entrepreneurs to write down, research, and address exactly whatit is they wish to do before they begin – as well as examine what starting a business will involve andhow the process will be tackled. Without this knowledge (which can take six months or longer toaccumulate), the entrepreneur will probably not be ready for business ownership. Just as important,critical outside obligations (e.g.: the onset of medical treatment, college tuition payments, financialproblems, unresolved crisis, personal dilemmas, and so on...) should be taken care of beforehand toavoid distractions. The understanding and support of partners, spouses, or children is equally ascrucial because many experienced practitioners insist that entrepreneurs do not have much time tospend with their loved ones during the first few years of a new business venture.What about the economy? Is it prudent to wait for the economy to improve before starting abusiness? Disney, Hewlett-Packard, and Microsoft all started during economic downturns - as did halfof the 30 companies that comprise the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Indeed, some analysts claim thata recession is a great time to open a business because wages are down, rents are cheaper, competitionis scarce, and goods and services can be found at a discount. That being said, there is no definitiveproof to suggest that recessions make starting a business easier. The availability of resources, personalabilities, and the current circumstances of the entrepreneur should all play major roles in determiningthe best time to start-up a business.Where Is the Best Place to Start A Business?The most obvious answer to this question is where there are plenty of customers. But one must alsotake into account the specifics of the area or region where prospective customers are located. Forexample, if you’re planning on setting up a business in a part of the world that you’re only partlyfamiliar with (perhaps because you fell in love with it while on vacation), do plenty of homework first.According to the World Bank’s International Finance Corporation (IFC), entrepreneurs planning onstarting a business in a foreign country or unfamiliar area should first ensure that the followingsituations exist:1. There should be a low number of rules, regulations, paperwork, and licenses so the business andits activities can be made legitimate in a timely manner.2. The business owner should be able to hire and fire employees with relative ease.3. The business owner should have the capacity to draw up and enforce a legal contract.4. The business owner should be able to obtain credit or borrow money.5. A low number of steps and procedures should exist so that the business can either be closeddown - or bankruptcy can be declared - with relative ease.Advice from the ProsThe answers to why, when, and where a business should be started form the foundation ofsuccessful entrepreneurship. ‘If you’re interested in starting a business the answers to a lot of yourquestions will arise after you’ve searched and explored both yourself and your reasons for doing so,’says restaurant owner Bernard Marche (founder of the Chick-a-Chick cafe in Warsaw, Poland). ‘To avoidsurprises and the unnecessary expenses behind them, examine each and every environmental,economic, and financial situation that surrounds you before taking action.’ Additional start-up advicefrom experienced entrepreneurs includes:- Avoid rushing into uncharted territory. Don’t leap before looking.- Know the unexpected places where an entrepreneurial lifestyle may lead. For example, if you’rea jewelry worker who loves the craft, but you’re sick and tired of laboring for someone else andwant to spend more time working as a designer, bear in mind that running your own business21© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgStarting Your Business: Why, When, and Where Should You Do It — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessmay involve more administrative than creative work.- Yes, it is possible to bake cookies, or build a piece of furniture, or design a website for a friendand be paid for it. But if you want to turn these pastimes into a business you must first find outif producing them on a regular basis can secure a living. Is there an ongoing market for theseproducts/services in your area? If not, can you afford to attract distant customers and ship yourproduct to them? Will the money you generate be enough to pay a mortgage and bills andsupport your family?- Before taking the entrepreneurial plunge, prepare for the obstacles that stand in your way. Novelsituations in business are rare so it is possible to determine much of what lies ahead.- Don’t leave a paying job to start your own enterprise until you have first sorted out what youwant to do, the direction you want to go, and the best time to start. Keep your current job whileexamining the self-employment options available. That way you won’t be deprived of incomebefore you begin.- If you have a good idea and have done your research, move quickly and prudently.Procrastination is a killer in the business world.- Whether starting a business or launching a new product, remember that the idea is to scoregoals, not just kick the ball. 100% commitment is mandatory. The harder you work, the luckieryou get. As famed Hollywood film producer Mike Todd once said, the meek may inherit the earth,but not in our lifetime.- Lastly, consider the often told (probably apocryphal) story about two explorers that were sent bya shoe company to a primitive part of the world to determine the viability of the market.‘Complete disaster!’ wired the first explorer, ‘No one here wears shoes.’ The telegram from thesecond explorer arrived a few hours later. ‘Fantastic opportunity!’ it read, ‘No one here wearsshoes!’22© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCommercial enterprise is not about sellers, it’s about buyers (customers). The idea is to match thewants and needs of customers with the interests and passion of the entrepreneur. This can be atime-consuming process. The owner and operator of Equation Business Solutions in Cape Town, SouthAfrica says that exploring a subject or product that the entrepreneur is familiar with (or curious about)is a good place to begin. Other suggestions include searching through the Yellow Pages to find anexisting idea that can be copied or expanded upon. Edwin Land, the inventor of Polaroid photography,once said that the best way to have a new idea is to stop thinking in terms of old ideas. In this regard,perhaps combining different professions can yield a result. An interest in accounting and boating, forexample, might be fused together to provide accounting services to the boating industry. Or maybeexperience with software and knowledge of transportation networks can be merged to create a newservice for suppliers or distributors. Additional options include examining both sides of an existingopportunity. For instance, security and private-police services make up the world’s fastest growingindustry, so perhaps a copycat security service can be developed; or maybe a marketable idea thatreduces the circumstances behind the need for more security is a better option. Other methods ofsearching for potential markets involve visiting areas with an economic level or geographic location ofpersonal interest to see if it has a needy segment – or investigating the commercial aspects of a field orsubject that appears interesting. The challenge for the entrepreneur is to match personal skills,interests, and capabilities with an inherent passion and tie it in to an underserved customer base.Following is a list of questions designed to help do just that:- What do I enjoy doing the most? Doing something enjoyable is a good way to ignite commitmentand possibly uncover an idea that will prove profitable. For example, the Boeing (aircraft)Company got its start after flight enthusiast Bill Boeing built a plane in 1916. One plane led totwo, then three… and so on. In Glasgow, Scotland child-lover Cathy Campbell turned the frontroom of her home into a crèche (a daycare centre). Cathy started small and insists she wants tostay small so she can focus on her clients and avoid too many administrative duties – therebyallowing her to do what she loves most, which is play with children.- What are my hobbies and/or interests? Anything from growing roses to personalizing softwareprograms to building model ships can be turned into a profitable business if the circumstancesare right – either by teaching others how to do it, by packaging and selling what is created, or byselling related products to fellow enthusiasts. For example, quite a number of multi-milliondollar computer companies (Apple, Dell, Microsoft…) were started by ‘computer nerds’ whoturned their computing interests into selling marketable computing products and services tosimilar enthusiasts.Chapter 3Finding a Good Business IdeaIn business, the idea is the main thing. Capital can be raisedand lost and raised again, but lose the idea and everythingis lost.’Gottlieb Duttweiler‘Opportunity is missed by most because it’s dressed in overallsand looks like hard work.’Thomas Edison23© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- What subject(s) or pastimes did I enjoy in college (or high school)? Think back to your student years.Can the one or two subjects you found most fascinating be turned into a money-making idea?With a little thought and effort they just might. For example, when MIT professor HaroldEdgerton invented the strobe light he couldn’t interest General Electric in its possibilities so hehooked up with two students and formed a business (EG&G) that photographed mechanicalprocesses at high speed, thereby providing a new way to look at, and solve, industrial problems.Similarly, Hewlett-Packard was formed by two Stanford students (Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett)who had a passion for electronics. One of their first products, an audio oscillator, was purchasedby Walt Disney for the making of Fantasia. Then there’s Gary Comer. With no more than a highschool education and a love of sailing, Gary started a business that supplied sailing equipment tofellow enthusiasts. The name of that business? Mail order giant, Lands’ End.- What marketable experience, knowledge, or skills do I possess? Almost everyone possesses a skill orknowledge that has the potential to make money. For example, Snap-On Tools began whenmachinists Joe Johnson and William Seidemann fashioned together a set of interchangeablesockets and wrench handles to make their job easier. The company where they worked rejectedtheir idea out of hand, but being experienced machinists Johnson and Seidemann knew theiridea was a sound one so they developed it on their own. In another example, fast food managerR. David Thomas helped Colonel Sanders succeed with his Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise thenwent on to use the additional experience he gained to start the Wendy’s burger chain (namedafter his daughter). Further examples of using personal skills to create a new business include‘mash-up’ operations that combine different web-based tools to create new search and softwarepossibilities or teaching-based operations that show others how to use digital photo software (orany new software for that matter). Technical processing or data collection services as well asservices that provide creative design work for documents, menus, or marketing provideadditional examples.- Have I ever looked at another business or product and thought ‘I can do better than that!’ Manysuccessful businesses get started because they’re better than what their competitors offer interms of service, quality, location, speed, or uniqueness. When Kemmons Wilson was chargedan additional fee at a roadside motel for each of his five children he became so upset he startedHoliday Inn. Polish immigrant Rueben Mattus, a high school dropout who scratched a meagerliving selling ice cream in Brooklyn, New York, suffered through years of price wars, cut-throatcompetition, and ingredient shortages caused by World War II before he finally decided to fighthis competitors by developing an ice cream that didn’t skimp on ingredients. After coming tothe conclusion that many people in America hated the Irish, the Italians, the Poles, and the Jews,Mattus came up with the fictitious Danish-sounding name of Haagen-Dazs (he reasoned that noone hated the Danes) and took over a niche luxury-food market that had previously not beenconsidered. In New York, dry-cleaning equipment salesman Leon Hirsch was milling around apatent broker’s office when he noticed an ungainly surgical stapler that had been inventeddecades earlier. Fascinated, he bought the licensing rights to the tool, improved its performance,and started The United States Surgical Corporation (it became a Fortune 500 company). Simplyput, people will usually pay good money for products or services that in some way improve uponwhat’s currently on the market.24© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Are the people in my community asking for, or in need of, a product or service? For centuries,perceptive entrepreneurs have known that products or services that are needed or wanted aresure-fire money makers. That’s how Levi Strauss (of ‘blue jeans’ fame) got his start in theclothing industry. Strauss immigrated to the United States to start a dry goods business, butafter landing in California he quickly discovered that most miners were desperate for clothingthat could withstand the rigors of the mining trade. Not wanting to pass up this opportunity(and not finding anything on the market to fit the bill), he fashioned a pair of trousers out ofcanvas, used rivets to hold the seams together, and created the ‘501 Blue Jean’. Avon Cosmeticswas founded by book salesman David McConnell who quickly discovered that the free perfumesamples he gave to women were more popular than his books. Decades later, Tom Fatjo andLouis Walters sensed that changing environmental laws were going to create opportunities forgarbage collection so they bought a specialized garbage truck to help fill the needs of theircommunity. Thirteen years passed during which time their business, Browning-Ferris, becamethe second largest waste disposal company in America. Lastly, the Kaiser supermarket in Berlin,Germany realized that most of the city’s population would be over the age of 50 by 2010, is nowraking in newfound profits thanks to a store designed specifically for the elderly. The storeincludes non-slip floors, wider aisles, magnifying glasses attached to shopping carts (to help readproduct labels), and steps lining the aisles so customers can reach items on high shelves.- What will make the world (or my neighborhood) a better place? New ways of thinking that can helpthe world become a better place to live can lead to much entrepreneurial success. For example,Anita Roddick founded the Body Shop because she was upset by the fact that most cosmeticswere tested on animals by squirting chemicals directly into their eyes. Her idea was to set up acompany that sold beauty products free from animal testing. One hundred years earlier, theBorden food company came up with a winning idea that made the world safer when founder GailBorden witnessed a number of infant deaths from putrefied milk and saw the need for anon-perishable substitute. Borden’s creative thinking and determination led to the discovery ofcondensed milk. The clockwork radio, a wind-up device invented by Trevor Baylis so people inremote places (without access to batteries) have the ability to stay in touch with the rest of theworld, became a worldwide testament to innovation and persistence (a wind-up laptop computerhas also been developed based on this concept). The water-purifying drinking straw, packed withfiltration aids, is yet another life-saving device designed to assist people in time of need. Overthe past few decades, farmers and livestock breeders have capitalized on markets that pay topprices for eco-friendly, organic products. The point here is that opportunities exist forentrepreneurs who invent or innovate new products or services, increase efficiency, develop safeproduct alternatives, improve work systems or manufacturing processes, or find ways to produceproducts that are easier on the environment and healthier for customers (see Chapter 35).- Is there an obvious problem out there just waiting for a solution? With so many people concernedabout clean, cheap energy (and the environment), business ventures that provide an alternativeto dirty and expensive energy practices are proving to be real money-spinners (again, seeChapter 35). For example, in 2005, Scottish entrepreneur David Gordon was exiting a meetingin Glasgow, Scotland when he noticed a tree swaying in the wind next to an apartment building.He began thinking about how the energy moving the tree could be harnessed to provide powerfor the building and he quickly realized that somebody somewhere would probably make afortune from wind power. He wanted that someone to be him. After doing some research,Gordon visualized a wind turbine small enough to fit on the top of a house or building. His nextmove was to develop a patented ‘inverter’ that pumps the turbine’s electricity straight into abuilding’s power structure. A range of products and services followed to complement thesustainable energy sector that’s being capitalizing on - including offering customers help withfinancing. The result? In his first year of business Gordon sold over 18,000 Windsave turbines ata price of around $4,400 per unit (Farrow, 2007), but it has not been smooth sailing; the25© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesscompany experienced many ups and downs along its way due to the pioneering aspect of itsproduct. Indeed, due to a series of quality control issues and other problems, it is difficult toascertain if the company is still in business. Meanwhile, in Eskilstuna, Sweden a new shoppingmall (ReTuna Återbruksgalleria) opened in early 2017. ‘The facilities contain both a recyclingcenter and a shopping mall. Customers can donate the items that they no longer need, and shopfor something new – all in one stop. Dropped off goods are sorted into various workshops wherethey are refurbished or repaired accordingly. Products are then sorted into 14 specialty shopsthat include furniture, computers, audio equipment, clothes, toys, bikes, and gardening andbuilding materials; all garnered from second-hand products. The center also includes a café andrestaurant with a focus on organic products, as well as a conference and exhibition facilitycomplete with a school for studying recycling’ (Ghent 2017).- Is there a current product or service on the market I truly believe in? Business ideas do not have to beoriginal. Sometimes an old idea can be copied and introduced into a new market to astonishingeffect. For example, after witnessing Domino’s Pizza’s quick home deliveries in his travelsthrough the United States, Leopoldo Pujals returned to Spain, set up a similar operation in1987, and named it TelePizza. By 2010, the company had opened 1,025 outlets around theworld. In April 2016, the company completed an IPO worth around €550-million. In theUnited States, Cheri Faith Woodward started the Faith Mountain Company, a $20-millionmail-order business that distributes herbs, dried flowers, kitchen implements and handicrafts.Although Woodward learned her trade from a local woman who had been sharing her knowledgewith others for decades, it was Woodward that turned this knowledge into a business. After25-years of business, the company closed and sold its mailing list and database, which containedthe names and addresses of over 1.7-million customers.- What do the people or customers in my current job complain about (or want) the most? Unhappycustomers can unwittingly uncover vast opportunities - if they’re taken seriously and if someonetakes the time to listen to them. For example, Buster Brown shoes came into being when shoesalesman George Warren Brown heard people complaining that most shoe fashions were staid.At this point in time (1878), the entire American shoe industry was located in New England soBrown developed a line of shoes that catered to his local market. Within a few years his productswere being sold coast to coast. More recently, a corporate executive in London, Englandoverheard several complaints circulating in his office about how difficult it was to find a goodplumber. Intrigued by the notion of setting out on his own and working with his hands, he tooka course in plumbing, became a registered plumber, and set up his own business. He now makesabout the same money per year as a plumber compared with what he made as an executive.26© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.org- Is there a need for a product or service in an underserved market? Too many small markets areignored by business communities because of prejudice, ignorance, outdated misconceptions, orjust plain laziness. Consider the GrameenPhone telecommunications company in Bangladesh,which was assisted in its start-up phase by Nobel Prize winner Mohammad Yunus.GrameenPhone (‘Gram’ means village) began selling mobile phones to impoverishedcommunities in 1997. Instead of sticking with the traditional business model of selling onephone at a time to a customer (which is impossible to do in a country where the average yearlyincome is only $286), a new business model was established in which a single mobile phone isleased to a village and shared by dozens of people. Six years later, with this innovative servicehaving expanded to include over 50-million people, GrameenPhone produced revenues of$330-million per annum. Future revenues are expected to rise to half a billion dollars. Equallyas important, by providing poor regions with a much-needed phone service, farmers and localbusinesspeople now have the ability to sell their products on a timelier basis. The resulting risein income levels has lifted many customers out of abject squalor – and all because an astuteentrepreneur named Iqbal Quadir took the time to figure out how the selling of a useful productcould be modified to fit a needy market.- Is there a type of person, group, or customer base I connect with? Those who enjoy working with theelderly, an ethnic group, hobbyists, children, mountain climbers, basketball players, or any formof potential customer probably harbor an above-average ability to talk with them, discover whatit is they need or want, and learn ways to serve them. That’s how Daniel Gerber, son of thepresident of the Fremont Canning Company in Michigan, came up with his revolutionary idea ofselling baby food. Gerber never thought much about parents with small children until his wifehad a baby. Only then did he realize how difficult it was to prepare and strain baby food. Afterconfirming this with countless parents he used his father’s machinery to develop food productsfor infants. Eventually his idea became so successful the company abandoned its adult line andconcentrated solely on making baby food. In another example, the all-female Pink Taxi service inMoscow, Russia began life when entrepreneur Olga Fomina discovered that a lot of women don’tlike to ride in taxis because most taxi drivers are men and men are the perpetrators of mostassaults on women. Her business idea was to start a taxi service that only caters to women – abusiness model that has spawned similar all-female taxi businesses in many other countries. How Stupid is a Stupid Idea?As mentioned in Chapter 1, fear can shut down any stage of the entrepreneurial process, however,unfounded apprehension or the opinions of others should not be allowed to drown a business ideabefore it’s been researched.‘After an idea has been conceived, a thorough research investigation is the best way to determine ifit’s viable,’ says the operator of South Africa’s Cape Town Boat Builder’s Initiative. This means examiningthe market to determine if demand is great enough to cover production costs and sustain long-termprofitability. A thorough research investigation will provide valuable information as to how a productcan be modified to maximize profits, how it can best be sold, the price customers are willing to pay forit, the size of the market – or, perhaps, the painful truth that the idea is simply not feasible (seeChapters 5 and 6). The dog poop collection industry (yes, you read that correctly) illustrates this point.Collecting dog excrement may seem like a strange way to make a living, yet over 300 suchbusinesses exist in North America alone. With $8-$10 being charged to clean up a typical householdyard, and the number of dog owners increasing, profits are – excuse the pun – piling up. In fact byJune 2010, one company (Pet Butler) in Texas serviced 50,000 clients and collected in excess of$500,000 every week (as of May 2017, the company boasts that it has ‘scooped’ over 24,254,962poops!).At the other end of the spectrum, way at the other end, consider the success of Starbucks coffeeFinding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business27© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgshops. Thinking back to the 1970’s when Starbucks began, it would seem absurd to create a businessmodel based on a coffee shop where the price of a cup of coffee was envisioned as $5 or $6, especiallyduring a time when most restaurants charged around 10-percent that amount. Millions of potentialcustomers, however, thought otherwise. The moral of the story? Don’t ‘pooh-pooh’ a business ideathat targets a bona fide customer base and satisfies a need.The Need for New Ideas Never EndsEven after running a successful business for years, at some point whatever is being sold - as well asthe way it’s being sold - may become tiresome in the eyes of customers. It therefore makes sense to beon the lookout for new products to sell, as well as new ways to add to, or improve, existing productsand services.The good news is that entrepreneurs do not have to go through this process alone. Good, reliableideas can (and should) come from a number of different sources if an effort is made to find them. Thechart below (FIGURE 3-1), which was derived directly from research collected for this book, revealswhere the entrepreneurs I questioned get most of their new product or business improvement ideas.As the diagram shows, 79% of successful business ideas come from sources other than businessowners and operators. In other words, profitable businesses are outward-looking and customerdriven; not inward-looking entities that act upon the singular judgment or whim of business owners.Figure 3-1: Where Do Small Business Operators Get Their Ideas?Clearly, finding a good business idea is not, nor should it ever be, a go-it-alone endeavor –particularly when most successful businesses are based on what customers want to buy, not what thebusiness wants to sell.Finding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesscustomers 27%self 21%employees 6%competitors 15%literature and/orthe internet 15%suppliers 16%28© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding A Good Business Idea — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- When a business idea is conceived, ignore the pessimists and rely on research. Entrepreneursoften succeed by breaking the rules and that means going against the conventional wisdom ofpeople who have no proof to backup their opinions.- Even if your business has been up and running for years, never stop thinking about refining oldideas and coming up with new ones.- It’s better to have a million ideas and no money than a million dollars and no ideas. A pile ofmoney with no ideas to nurture it will soon be lost.- Dare to be different. Those who travel with the herd, often end up where the herd is going,which is usually nowhere.- Be prepared to compromise. This is not a contradiction of the above statements. Commercialbusiness is about serving customers, not the whims and self-interests of a business owner.- Allow research - rather than opinion - to determine the difference between a good idea, a fantasy,a scam, or a lousy idea.29© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWhich is best: starting a business from scratch or buying an existing one? Setting-up anindependent operation or owning a franchise? Working part-time or full-time? Each of these optionshas its advantages and disadvantages and, for the aspiring entrepreneur, each should be weighedagainst (a) the product he or she wishes to offer, (b) the intended customer base, and, (c) the abilities,character, and work habits of the entrepreneur. For example, if an entrepreneur is socially orientedthen he or she should probably avoid businesses that demand long periods of solitude. Equally, thosewho enjoy working by themselves should avoid a business that requires much customer interaction.Similarly, entrepreneurs who work best in the morning (or evening) should gravitate toward a businessthat requires working during these times. And business owners that want to start small and stay smallwill have different needs and concerns than those who have plans to grow. With so many optionsavailable the following advice should prove helpful:- Try a business first before starting one. ‘Before choosing a long-term career path, talk with peoplewho have taken the same one,’ says the owner of Northwest Prototypes Ltd., in Manchester,England. ‘Or volunteer to work part-time in a similar business or industry to ensure that it’severything you expect it to be,’ suggests the founder of Pamir Production Services in Warsaw,Poland. Another option is to discuss personal needs and abilities with family, friends, andcolleagues. They may be able to help simply by stating the obvious. Whichever option is chosen,making a life-changing decision should not be done alone, particularly when it involves others.Ask for advice and opinions of those in the know.- Would you be willing to spend a lot of money to have someone else set-up a business for you? If so, youmay wish to consider buying an existing business or franchise. Note, however, that this does notmake running a business any easier. The owner of a McDonald’s franchise in London, England,for example, says that she often stays in her office until ten o’clock at night completing theunending stream of paperwork that running a food service requires.- How much time are you willing to spend on a business or idea? The amount of time it takes to learn anew trade or skill and get a new business venture up (and keep it up) is considerable. In effect,when starting a business, entrepreneurs begin their professional life all over again – from thebottom. For example, many years ago a friend of mine sold his dental laboratory. He spentyears building it, but after too many long nights completing day-to-day business activities andkeeping up with government regulations and insurance requirements - in addition to his regularlab work - he decided that he would rather have a nine-to-five job at a hospital so he could spendmore time with his son.Chapter 4Setting-Up a Business: The Options‘To find out what one is fitted to do,and to secure an opportunity to do it,is the key to happiness.’John Dewey30© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSetting Up a Business: The Options — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessThe OptionsGenerally speaking, there are four types of business operations from which an entrepreneur canchoose:Part-Time Businesses:Most part-time enterprises operate during evenings and/or weekends. Since this type ofemployment is often an offshoot of a hobby or other interest, the benefits of working in this mannercan translate into enormous job satisfaction. Other advantages include not having to leave anotherjob and/or avoiding the financial risk of investing in a full-time business. Tax advantages are anadditional bonus for part-time entrepreneurs if working from home can be claimed as a tax deduction.Part-time work also allows an entrepreneur to ‘test the waters’ of a potential full-time endeavor beforetaking the plunge, thereby providing valuable research and experience and possibly lowering risk.The disadvantages of a part-time business include the fact that the work the entrepreneur performsoften falls behind other more pressing commitments such as a full-time job (which means that thepart-time business may never fully function because enough time can’t be devoted to it). Additionally,businesses that operate part-time and require direct customer engagement provide customers withless time to purchase or partake in the product or service being offered. Lastly, a feeling of holdingdown two jobs can be unhealthy and possibly lead to marital or social problems.Full-Time Businesses…fall into three categories: Start-ups, Existing Businesses, and Franchises.A. The start-up business involves building a business from scratch (which often requires years ofhard work). If successful, however, many entrepreneurs insist that the results are veryrewarding. Much of this book deals with starting a business from scratch so it’s not necessary togo into details here. Suffice it to say that building a business from the ground up is the mosttime-consuming and arduous of an entrepreneur’s options. According to one self-madebusinesswoman, the difference between starting a business from scratch and buying an existingone is comparable to giving birth to a baby or adopting one that’s already been potty trained.Either way, hard work lies ahead.B. Buying an existing business is an alternative well worth exploring, however, before handing overhard-earned cash for a business that’s on the market it’s imperative to first know why it’s for sale.Several years ago, for example, two British entrepreneurs decided to buy a seaside enterprisethat was on the market for £100,000. Fortunately, before any money changed hands, a licensedappraiser discovered that it was only worth £15,000 because it was unprofitable, it had nocontracts to guarantee future sales, and the equipment that comprised it was outdated andbeyond warranty. The moral of the story is that a sunny climate, a charming setting, or amisplaced romantic notion of business ownership are not valid reasons for buying (or starting) abusiness. Similarly, it’s wise to be skeptical of stories from sellers about sickness, dreams ofretirement or travel, and so on. Many businesses are on the market because demand for theirproducts or services no longer exists. That’s why having experience with related merchandise,equipment, and customers is so important. Before buying, think about procuring the services ofa non-biased, outside professional to help determine what an on-the-market business is reallyworth. The costs involved in running the business and any hidden dangers or debts should alsobe determined. Investigating the real reasons why a business is for sale can be achieved in partby obtaining answers to the following questions:31© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSetting Up a Business: The Options — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- What is the business’s history?- Are there any other owners?- Is the business in debt? (If so, to whom and for how much?)- Are any legal actions pending against the business?- Are any special licenses or permits required?- Is the property and/or its equipment in need of repair or still under warranty?- Who are the business’s main customers, what is their history, where are they located and willthey stay with the business if it changes hands?- Who are the business’s main suppliers, what is their history, and where are they located?- Have (or will) changing environmental conditions or demographics alter future sales prospects?- Who are the business’s main competitors, where are they located, and what is their specialty?- How often has the business been audited? (Prospective buyers should be privy to all records)- What are the obligations of the sale?- Does the sale include inventory? If so, is the inventory still valid and/or up to date?- Is the prospective buyer entitled to the copyrights and/or trademarks of the business?- How long will it take to pay back any loans? (What are the financial goals of the prospectivebuyer?)C. Franchising is a third entrepreneurship option. The advantages of owning a franchise includebeing a part of a (supposedly) tried-and-tested operation that can regularly provide marketingand business assistance. Disadvantages include the fact that not all franchises are the helpful,license-to-print-money operations they claim to be. For example, one entrepreneur in theUnited States bought a franchised clothing store thinking that because the name of theenterprise was well known it was a secure investment. Sometime later, however, he watchedhelplessly as an investment company with no retail background bought the parent company thatlicensed the franchises. When the inevitable bankruptcy occurred, he could not bail out withoutpermission from the bankruptcy court (which was not forthcoming) and he – as well as all theother franchise owners - lost his security deposit and investment (Halloran, 1992).Note that more than money may be needed to acquire a franchise. Some franchise companiesinsist that buyers undergo an extended training course and a thorough background check beforehand(which is a very good sign). Others provide no training or assistance whatsoever. High-pressure salestactics are another commonplace occurrence with franchises. Once an interest in a franchise is stated,it’s not unusual to become the target of a slick marketing campaign designed to get the unsuspectingentrepreneur to quickly hand over his or her money.Basic questions that need answering before purchasing a franchise include:- The full legal name of the franchiser (or business) and its complete history.- The names and contact information of all the people involved in the administration of thecompany.- A full account of all administrative, criminal, or civil legal action currently pending (orcompleted) against the franchiser (or the business) and its employees.- A full disclosure of any bankruptcy filings.- A full disclosure of all fees, costs, and other payments including service fees, lease payments,insurance, training fees, franchising fees, advertising and royalties.- If the franchiser (or another company) is the sole supplier of certain goods or services, a list isrequired as to what needs to be purchased and at what cost.- If the franchiser (or the business owner) provides financing, a full disclosure must be made32© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSetting Up a Business: The Options — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessregarding terms and conditions.- Explanations of franchising assistance, training programs, and territory rights – as well as theuse of commercial symbols, logos, or trademarks must be provided.- The management obligations of the franchise purchaser must be clearly stated (i.e.: Does thelegal owner of the business have to manage the business, or can a hired employee do so?).- A statement must be provided fully explaining license renewals or extension provisions.- An explanation of the earnings clause (if any) must be fully and clearly stated (i.e.: monthly,quarterly or annual payments, the franchiser is entitled to).- A full disclosure of all franchises currently (or formerly) in operation – including contactinformation – should be provided. (This will allow the prospective buyer to conduct his or herown research.)- Audited financial statements should be provided.- A statement of the acknowledgement of receipt of information must be given (in the USA, thesale of a franchise is not considered legally final until ten days after this receipt is signed).(Halloran, 1992)Advice from the ProsWhen perusing available business ownership options, remember that the abilities, character, andneeds of the entrepreneur should match the type of business the entrepreneur wants to run, theproduct being sold, and the customer base being served. The better the match the greater the chanceof success and fulfillment.- Know your strengths, weaknesses, skills, experience, and limits before going into business.- Compare your options and your abilities with the needs of prospective customers before makingany business commitment.- Ensure that there’s a good fit with the product or service you wish to offer and the type ofbusiness you envision. For example, if you wish to start a part-time personal accounting serviceyou may need to be available during more than just weekends and evenings.- Get a full picture of local, state, and national laws – as well as licenses and permits - beforejumping into a new business venture. The industry you want to work in may be so overregulated that you may not be able to pursue exactly what it is you wish to do.- Don’t forget to work out how customers will fit in to your business plans.- Ask a lot of questions when buying an existing business. If possible, try to get the owner tocommit (in writing) to providing assistance for a set period of time after the sale in order toensure a smooth transition.- Always check the background, present conditions, and the potential future of the business youwish to buy before signing anything.33© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEver on the lookout for new business opportunities, the owner of a small gift shop in the UnitedStates noticed that most stores in his area did not sell affordable tableware. Two local retailers offeredexpensive high-end items, but neither sold anything designed for everyday use. After mulling this factover for several weeks the shop owner eventually decided to offer low-cost tableware to his customers.He subsequently invested tens of thousands of dollars in a new product line and spent severalthousand more refitting his shop to display his new investment. Unfortunately, it took over a yearbefore he finally discovered that there was no demand for his new product range.Regrettably, a straightforward investigation into local demographics would have revealed that therewere a high number of retirees in the area (who did not need new tableware), marriage licenses wereon the decrease, income levels had been dropping for years, and there were fewer families withchildren around. If that wasn’t enough, the shop owner’s higher-priced competitors boastedinstallment plans, credit purchases, and other incentives he couldn’t afford to offer. Clearly, he wassunk before he even began.The irony of this story is that the shop owner could easily have avoided his loss if he had firstacquired some basic information before spending his money. Instead, he relied on an uninformedhunch, an unchecked desire to branch into a new area, and a misplaced notion of local buying habits(Halloran, 1992).Step Number 1: Building a Strong FoundationWhether a business idea involves selling a copycat product (or service) or selling something that’stotally unique, there are only two reasons why an entrepreneur should undertake the time, effort, andexpense of creating a new business to introduce it: (1) customers have shown that they want it and,(2) there is sufficient enough demand for the proposed product to make a profit.Successful enterprises sell what customers want to buy rather than what the entrepreneur wants tosell. Period.How does an entrepreneur find out what customers want to buy? Research. The more researchthat’s conducted in business the less risk is taken. Equally as important is that the investment costsbehind a product or service should relate directly to the amount of research that’s performed. Forexample, it’s probably not necessary for a restaurant to conduct an expensive, full-scale study todetermine its next menu item. On the other hand, a new restaurant facing expensive equipment andraw material purchases coupled with employee training costs and other investments in time andmoney will require more scrutiny. Why? Consider this statistic: on average, out of every 100 proposednew product ideas that are conceived by manufacturers, 39 begin the development process, 17 surviveit, and eight reach the marketplace. Yet incredibly, only one product achieves the objectives behindintroducing it in the first place (which is to make money).Chapter 5An Introduction to the Importanceof Business ResearchThe only true wisdom is in knowing that you know nothing.Socrates34© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessBefore setting out on a new business venture, it is therefore important to know the reasons whymost failed products do not achieve their objectives. These reasons include:- The potential market was poorly studied and/or overestimated.- A ‘me too’ type of product was offered, which was no different from the competition’s.- The costs of developing the product were higher than budget restrictions allowed.- The product was improperly positioned in the market.- The paying public saw the product as too expensive.- The product was poorly designed.- Competitors fought back harder than anticipated.Conversely, products (or services) are more apt to produce a profit when:- A well-defined concept is initiated beforehand in which the market is thoroughly analyzed,customer requirements are met, and the benefits of the product are made abundantly clear,- The product is seen to be unique and superior to its competition,- A successful merger between technology and customer needs is made, and,- All stages of a successful product launch are addressed (customer needs are determined, theproduct is well designed and thought through, extensive tests are conducted to ensure that theproduct will be purchased by its intended customers, development needs are met, a cost analysisproves profitability, production methods are found to be sustainable, delivery times and targetsare feasible, and the product is well marketed).Defining Market ResearchThe word market is defined as a collection of buyers (or potential buyers) of a particular product orservice. The purpose of market research, therefore, is to gather information about a product and itsdemand. Knowing the size and make-up of a market is a good indicator of how potentially lucrative aproduct might be (see page 71, Figures 11-1 to 11-3). As the owner of X-Pak S.A., in Verviers, Belgiumsays, ‘there is no end of finding new ways to make life easier, to innovate existing products, to improvea service, or to sell something. Good research will help you do all of these things. Research candetermine if a product idea has profit potential and if demand will sustain a steady income.’Additionally, a thorough research investigation will help:- reveal more about a product idea (including its costs) and the target market.- discover how the product should be sold (and how much of it people might buy).- determine the optimal location where the product should be sold.- find the best price at which to sell the product.- the entrepreneur learn to speak more intelligently about the product.- the entrepreneur connect with the paying public.- reveal information about the size and abilities of the competition.- explore the demographic make-up of a potential customer base.- discover ways to modify the product or service to maximize its potential, and,- determine if it’s time to let go of an unsuitable idea and find another one.35© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessThe Objectives of Market ResearchWhen asked how he succeeds in business, Simon Windsor, the now retired former owner andfounder of the UltraForce Group worldwide recruitment firm (which was based in the UK) said, ‘Theabsence of evidence is not necessarily the evidence of absence. So I’m usually very sure before I investin the unknown.’To help shed light on the unknown, Simon suggests that every business research project shouldpursue two main objectives:1. Determine an accurate estimate of costs, and,2. Produce a reliable estimate of revenues.For example, if an entrepreneur plans to make a living selling ice cream, he or she will need to know:A. how much it costs to sell ice cream (including equipment, raw materials, licenses, etc), and,B. how many scoops of ice cream will have to be sold per week to cover costsResearch into the answers behind these objectives should:(a) identify who is going to buy the product,(b) determine how many are going to buy it and,(c) provide a good estimation of how long demand for the product will last.Tools for Conducting Marketing ResearchMarket research is a four-stage procedure.1. During the first stage, a question or opportunity is defined in regards to the product theentrepreneur wishes to introduce. (For example, can the local market support a new ice creamparlor?)2. In the second stage of research, the entrepreneur must decide on the tools he or she will use toobtain the necessary data (e.g.: surveys, demographic studies, income analysis, etc.).3. Collection of information occurs in the third stage.4. The fourth stage analyzes all information that has been gathered.Two types of data tools fulfill the second stage.- Primary Data consists of obtaining information firsthand, at its source, for a specific purpose(see Chapter 6). Methods of primary data collection include questionnaires, personalinterviews, interviews with groups of people (focus groups), and mail and telephone surveys.- Secondary Data involves information that has already been collected – usually for anotherpurpose. Examples include demographic studies, surveys, college and university researchprojects, magazines, books, government data, Internet searches, and so on. Secondaryinformation can also be found in libraries, Small Business Administration (SBA) offices, theService Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), local Small Business Development Centers(SBDC), local enterprise councils, a Chamber of Commerce, or even a community bank. Carefulinternet searches can also be invaluable.36© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessSources of Secondary Data CollectionSecondary data is the easiest source to begin with because it has already been collected - thusmaking it cheaper and faster to obtain. Common sources of secondary data include, but are by nomeans limited to:• Books. Examples include:- The Business Periodical Index, which lists business articles that appear in major businesspublications.- The Encyclopedia of Associations, which lists and describes organizations and groups across theUSA.- Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys, which provide statistics and analyses of industries.• Commercial Information (usually sold to subscribers). Examples include:- The A.C. Nielsen Company. Provides data on market share, retail prices, sales, televisionaudiences, household purchases and much more.- Information Resources, Inc. Collects supermarket scanner information, grocery productmovement data, and customer behavior.- NFO Research. Provides information for mail order businesses, the beverage industry, producttesting, attitude and usage studies, tracking, and market segmentation.- Simmons Market Research Group (MRB Group). Publishes an annual report on lifestyles andregional demographics in regards to age, sex, income, and brand preference.• Government Publication Titles. Examples include:- The Annual Survey of Manufacturers- Business Statistics- The Census of Manufacturers- The Census of Population- The Census of Retail Trade- Foreign Economic Trends and their Implications for the United States- Industrial Outlook- The Monthly Labor Review- The Survey of Current Business- The Vital Statistics Report• International Data Sources. Examples include:- The Asian Economic Handbook- Country Studies- The Demographic Yearbook (information on 220 countries published by the UN)- The Economic Survey of Europe- The Europa Yearbook- The Statistical Yearbook (UN)- International Financial Statistics- International Marketing Data and Statistics- The International Trade Statistics Yearbook (published by the UN)37© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business• Periodical Titles. Examples include:- Advertising Age- The Journal of Marketing- Campaign- The Journal of Marketing Research- Chain Store Age- The Progressive Grocer- International Journal of Research in Marketing- Marketing Week- The Journal of Consumer Research- Sales and Marketing ManagementSources of Primary Data CollectionMake no mistake, primary data requires courage, time, and effort to collect. Questions must beproposed and written down, the right people need to be approached, and answers have to be analyzedin an unbiased manner (again, see Chapter 6 for workable suggestions on how to achieve theseobjectives). Don’t be afraid to ask for help. Knowledgeable people who have been through this processbefore will greatly add to the validity of research results. Examples of primary data collection include:1. Observing the Behavior of People.- Posing as a customer to see what a competitor is doing- Counting the number of customers that walk into a similar business or stop in front of a display- Showing preliminary ads or samples to customers in order to gauge their reaction- Investigating vehicular traffic flow patterns and/or the location of competitors2. Telephone InterviewingPhoning potential interviewees is a fast, efficient way to speak to large numbers of people.Numbers from neighbourhood or membership phone books can provide a rich source of contactsbecause people of similar income brackets usually cluster in the same area. The drawback to phoneinterviews is that many people use answering machines to screen their calls and/or are offended byunsolicited phone calls (especially during mealtimes). Another obstacle of phone interviewing is thatmobile phone numbers can be difficult to obtain.3. Group Interviews (Focus Groups) Bringing a number of people together (or visiting a group or club that meets on a regular basis) canbe a convenient way to gather opinions, explore issues, and probe for information. A good focus groupcan also act like a brainstorming session in that the input of different people working together usuallyproduces more than what one individual can provide on his or her own. Drawbacks include: preexisting groups may not paint an accurate picture of the community as a whole, groups can be harderto control than one-on-one interviews (individual voices may not be heard in a group), and somegroups may expect payment in return for their time.4. QuestionnairesA questionnaire is a written set of questions designed to obtain and focus a targeted participant’sresponse (which is harder to do than it sounds). Questionnaires can contain open-ended questions (inwhich the respondent provides a short answer) or closed-ended questions (in which the answers arealready written and the respondent chooses the most appropriate response). Each has its advantagesand disadvantages. Close-ended questions can be answered easily and quickly, but because theiranswers are limited they don’t allow for unforeseen options. Open-ended questions can reveal morethan closed-ended questions, but can turn people off if they’re too personal or require long answers.38© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessWhether open or closed, questions should be simple, clear, concise, and purpose-driven. Don’t beafraid to play around with questions if they do not produce meaningful responses. Most people whouse questionnaires learn as they go.Questionnaires should avoid: (1) biased wording, (2) words, terms, or phrases unfamiliar to thegeneral public, (3) poorly phrased questions, (4) difficult, uninteresting, or personal questions, and (5)too many questions. Take a look at the following examples developed to explore the potential marketfor a new restaurant and the corrective comments below each:1. Do you enjoy eating in a good restaurant? Yes ( ) No ( )Why ask this question? Unless you’re speaking to shut-ins, the answer is obvious.2. What is the most conspicuous and elemental factor in your choice of an eating establishment?Huh?3. Would you be interested in a new restaurant if it opened in this area?This is a biased question. Most people would probably say yes, but that doesn’t proveanything.4. How much money do you make in a year?Whoa! Too personal!Following are better questions to ask:1. On average, how many times a month do you eat out?2. What features, foods, or services in a restaurant make you want to return?3. Which restaurants do you hear good things about and/or like to frequent? Why?4. Do you believe that there are too many restaurants, take-away services, or food-delivery servicesin this area?5. Where is the most convenient location around here for a new restaurant to open?6. On average, how much money do you think is a reasonable amount to spend when eating out?Although some experts think that questionnaires are vastly overused, their versatility neverthelessmakes them popular and easily administered in the following ways:One-on-One Interviews allow for a longer time to be spent with an interviewee, which offers theability to demonstrate a product and gauge a reaction. Since an interviewer also interacts directly withhis or her interviewees, it makes the answering of questions difficult to ignore. Additionally, mostintelligent people, if trained properly, can administer a questionnaire, which means that severalinterviewers can spread out over a wide area. The downside of one-on-one interviews is that they’reusually time consuming.While the human element is lost with Mailed Questionnaires, a mass mail-out can containdescriptive photos and be relatively inexpensive to print and send. Unfortunately, the return rate formail-outs is notoriously low (sometimes below one-percent) unless some type of incentive is used (i.e.:money or a small gift is offered for a return - or - the completed questionnaire becomes part of a prizedrawing).E-mailed Questionnaires are extraordinarily cost-efficient and easy (and can include photos), but alist of e-mail addresses is needed beforehand. Moreover, most people hate unsolicited e-mail and useprotective measures to prevent receiving them. When working with e-mail there is also the possibilityof multiple returns from a single source, which will skew results.Lastly, a Website Questionnaire has all the advantages of e-mail, however, the target audience mustbe Internet savvy and be aware that the website exists. Equally, having participants answer questionson a website may offer no control over who responds. Without taking proper precautions, anyone inany location can submit an opinion – or a hundred opinions – thereby skewing the results.39© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn Introduction to the Importance of Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessDon’t Walk Away from the Hard Work and Time that Research DemandsAs stated at the beginning of this chapter, the point behind research is to reduce risk. The moremoney a business needs to get off the ground, the more proof is needed to ensure that the investmentbehind it is a wise one. When conducting research don’t talk to a half dozen friends and familymembers, then send out a few questionnaires and consider the task complete. Remember thatresearch is the best way to obtain an estimate of future sales. This can be accomplished in part byexploring the demographic trends listed in the public records of local city halls (e.g.: is the populationof the type of people who will buy your product going up or down?). Lastly, always keep in mind thatmarket research is not a perfect science because buying behavior is notoriously difficult to pin down.Therefore, since markets have a tendency to change rapidly, different research sources and methodsshould be used to confirm results – a process called triangulation. In other words, combine at least oneor more primary and secondary approaches before establishing a conclusion.Advice from the Pros- Develop a clear, written vision of what type of service or product you want to sell - then refine itwith research. Scottish entrepreneur Michelle Mone, creator of the Ultimo lingerie line (andfounder of MJM International), spent three-and-a-half years researching the design and tailoringof her famous bra before hitting upon a style and shape that satisfied her intended customers.She became a leader in her chosen field thanks to the research she conducted before going intobusiness.- Know your true intentions and why you want to start a business – good research questions willflow from knowing exactly what you want to do and why (see Chapter 6).- Learn to describe your business (or product) and its benefits in less than thirty seconds. Doingso will enable you to converse with people without boring them - and it will provide more timefor the people you are questioning to speak their minds.- Conduct as much of your own research as possible. This does not mean that you should not askfor help. It means that since you are responsible for your business you should be deeply involvedin all aspects of the research process.- Carry out a pilot study before undertaking a major research project. A pilot study tests researchquestions and methods against a dozen or so people to determine if the questions asked in aquestionnaire, as well as the way they are presented, are thorough and appropriate.- Don’t ignore the competition. When conducting research, find out what potential customersthink about your competitors.- Investigate the costs of producing your product as you explore the potential market. Costs mustalways be weighed against profit potential before a business can be deemed viable.- Don’t forget to factor insurance needs when researching cost estimates.40© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSometime after the collapse of the Berlin Wall in late 1989, numerous Polish intellectuals, who hadpreviously been living and working outside Poland, journeyed back to their native country to capitalizeon the demise of communism as well as a baby boom that had resulted 20-years earlier due to a strictcurfew imposed by communist authorities (as reported in The Economist, Polish workers took to theirbeds during this period because there was little else for them to do).In less than two years, over 350 private higher education institutes sprang up like mushrooms aftera spring rain. But by 2009, higher education enrollments peaked; and by 2020 the number of 19-yearolds in Poland is predicted to fall to 361,500 – which is half the size it was in 2002.Many universities, both in state and private sectors, are now under threat because there are simplynot enough students to fill available classrooms. The result is that departments and faculties arefeeling the pinch and financial cutbacks are taking their toll. International students are being targetedmore than ever before with tuition and accommodation costs that are lower than those in theirrespective countries. And admission standards are reportedly lower than ever. ‘My colleagues say thatthe average student in the 1990s was much better than the current ones,’ says Benjamin Stanley, whotaught at a university in Warsaw from 2011-2013. He adds that Poland now has too many universitystudents of doubtful academic quality and that too many are graduating with degrees that cannot getthem a well-paying job. This sentiment is echoed by former Polish prime minister Donald Tusk, whopublically put this situation into perspective for young adults by remarking that it’s better to be awell-paid welder than an unemployed social science graduate. (Grove, 2014)What does all this mean for the entrepreneur? No matter how good a business opportunity is, andNo matter how good a business opportunity is, and no matter how successful a business becomes, theneed for gathering, updating, and interpreting information for the purpose of benefiting fromconstantly changing markets - and then acting upon this information - never ends..Conducting External ResearchThe moment a business starts trading it cannot stand still. Economic environments anddemographics are constantly changing, which means that an astute entrepreneur should not only beaware of what is going on inside his or her business, but also the dynamics that are in play outside it.And that’s because the external environment of a business (which the business often cannot control)does affect the internal environment (the systems and procedures that operate inside the business).Vigilance and action is therefore required to ensure that a complimentary match exists between thetwo. Let’s start with the external environment. The following steps are designed to help explore theexternal environment in which an entrepreneur conducts business:Step #1. Define what you have and what you wish to do.This includes identifying current resources, short-term goals, and long-term goals. Remember tocommit everything to writing. The honing of goals and the defining and clarifying of thoughts andsolutions always improves during the process of writing.In this age, which believes there is a shortcut to everything,the greatest lesson to be learned is that the most difficultway is, in the long run, the easiest..Henry MillerChapter 6Suggestions for ConductingBusiness Research41© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSuggestions for Conducting Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessStep #2. Evaluate your idea (or product) and the industry to which it belongs.Gather as many opinions as possible. Understanding how customers interpret an idea or product isalways more significant than the entrepreneur’s interpretation. Among the many questions to askwhen conducting external research are:- What is the history of the industry in which the business idea is located (both in general andlocally)? Is it on the rise? Is it declining? Why?- What are the benefits of the product or service?- What are the product’s uses? (see Chapter 24 and the section titled Uses, Users, and Usage)- Is there a real need for the product? How long will that need last?- Can the proposed product be measured against an existing product? How?- Can the product be adapted for other more profitable uses? How?- Will the business have the ability to provide what is wanted, when it’s wanted, and how it’swanted?- Does the product require a previously unforeseen special license, insurance requirement,distribution system, or other expense?Step#3. Know your customers- Who will use the product? (Be specific. No product can be sold to everyone. A good customerprofile takes into consideration: sex, age, ethnicity, religion, income level, education level,stage-of-life [i.e.: singles, students, parents, retirees], transportation needs, etc. Contact a localcensus bureau for details. In the USA, this information can be accessed at www.census.gov).- Where are the most ideal customers located?- Why will customers use the product?- How will they use it?- What benefits will they derive from the product?- How much of the product will they use? Can the product be sold in the right amounts?- Can prospective customers afford the product – and afford to keep using it?Step #4. Demographics.- Is the population of the targeted customer base on the rise or is it decreasing?- What is the current (and projected) economic situation of the area?- What are the local purchasing trends?Step #5. Research the competition.- Is there a business that currently provides a similar product?- Can another business produce the product cheaper or better?- Will local stores carry the product?Step #6 (For existing businesses)- What do our customers think of our current business, products, and service?- Are our marketing programs working? Why or why not?- How many customers do we know on a first name basis? Have we asked their opinion?- Are we using purchase and credit records to build customer profiles and data bases? Can we usethis information to determine what our current customers might want to buy in the future?- Do we offer incentives for return visits? If not, why not - and what can we do about it?42© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSuggestions for Conducting Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessStep #7 Analyze your research- Do the demographics support a sustainable market?- Does the information gathered from steps 1-5 fit into the demand needed to sustain sales?- Do any changes need to be made to my idea or product?- Will providing/producing the product require more capital (or time) than was originally thought?Making AdjustmentsDon’t ignore research results if they don’t reveal what is expected. Almost every business ideaeither needs a bit of tweaking or an outright alternative somewhere along the way. ‘Negative resultsshould be seen as an opportunity, not a threat,’ says the owner of Arpi Holding in Oslo, Norway. Forexample, if the entrepreneur needs more money than was originally envisioned, perhaps he or she cansell the original idea to an existing company. Or maybe the business will have to start small and staysmall for a longer period of time than previously thought (there’s nothing wrong with that). Perhapsan office or shop can be rented or leased instead of purchased – or maybe working from home is abetter option (if licensing laws permit it). If research shows that customers don’t want to go out andbuy a proposed product, might they consider having it delivered instead? For example, if a restaurantis envisioned but no one seems interested, would customers take to a specialized service (e.g.: mealdeliveries, catering, wholesaling, take-aways, cooking lessons, etc)? The point is to investigate all thealternatives and stay open-minded. Determining whether an idea should be doggedly pursued,modified, or abandoned, is one of the most difficult decisions an entrepreneur has to make.Conducting Internal ResearchAssessing a business’s internal environment requires honesty and openness and should not relysolely on the judgment of one person. Whether a business is in the design stages or has been up andrunning for years, regular internal evaluations should address the following:- Skills. How well can (or will) the business and its people do what is supposed to be done?- Systems. How efficiently does the business serve its customers?- Structure. Does the set-up of the business promote peak performance?- Values. What are the priorities of the business?- What are the strengths and weaknesses of the person or people behind the business?- What are (or will be) the overhead costs?Researching the Cost of OverheadsExpenses associated with the everyday running of a commercial enterprise are called overheads.Generally speaking, overheads must be paid whether or not a product is made or sold. Overheads aretherefore an important factor in determining long-term costs. Examples of overheads include:- Raw material costs- Equipment and supply costs (including raw materials and office supplies)- Insurance premiums- Telephone bills, printing costs, leasing or hiring fees, travel expenses, repairs, etc.- Legal fees- Rent and utility expenses- Advertising and marketing costs- Shipping and storage fees (the monthly costs of transporting and warehousing)- Wages and salaries- Accounting fees43© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSuggestions for Conducting Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessMany of the successful business operators interviewed for this book said that they always eye theiroverheads with a desire to reduce them (e.g.: switching to lower-cost suppliers, finding cheaperpremises, reducing packaging needs, etc.). Put another way, endlessly exploring new ways to conductbusiness operations helps ensure that expenses are kept low, less waste occurs, and greater efficiencybecomes standard.SWOT AnalysisMuch of the information from external and internal research can be graphically represented bywhat is called a SWOT analysis (SWOT is an acronym for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities andThreats). The purpose of a SWOT analysis is to depict internal and external environments in aneasy-to-read format. When a clear picture of the opportunities and challenges faced by a business arelaid out, it becomes easier to identify, add to, and investigate areas that need to be addressed. FIGURE6-1 on the following page shows how an ice cream parlor can be analyzed by a SWOT analysis. As thediagram illustrates, strengths and weaknesses refer to internal business factors, while opportunities andthreats correlate to outside environmental influences.Figure 6-1: SWOT Analysis exampleSTRENGTHSOwner has experience in food serviceOwner has many connections in the industryOwner willing to take an educated riskOwner willing to work long hoursMust buy (not lease or rent) all equipmentOPPORTUNITIESLocal area has lots of touristsNo portable ice cream vans being usedPotential market for catering to parties/functionsWEAKNESSESOwner has never run a businessOwner unsure of tax and accounting practicesHelp from family is not forthcomingMust buy (not lease or rent) all equipmentTHREATSSeveral restaurants offer take-away icecream serviceLocal government frowns on small businessesThe ice cream market is highly seasonal(External factors)(Internal factors)44© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSuggestions for Conducting Business Research — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessNote that the more honest and thorough an entrepreneur is with his or her SWOT assessment, thebetter the chances are of tackling the challenges involved with starting up a business. Note also thatmost businesses will have many more critical factors listed (i.e.: factors that are crucial to businesssuccess and can be measured against competitors) than the few depicted in the diagram.Advice from the Pros- When starting a business, don’t remain focused on the internal happenings of the little kingdomyou plan on running. You must also stay on top of external trends (demographic changes,competitor, marketing schemes, and so on).- Learn to handle negativity. The point of research is to locate problems and openly discuss them– not shy away from them or deny they exist.- Be open to advice and feedback. Listen and act upon what others say.- In the never-ending battle to keep expenses down, focus on eliminating waste and improvingefficiency rather than simply cutting costs. All too often, constantly cutting costs results in areduction of quality that can turn off potential customers.45© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusinesses that perform their function where a customer is located (e.g.: gardeners, plumbers,painters, etc…), as well as operations that do not require direct face-to-face contact with clients(website-based businesses, writing, virtual assistants, online tasking, etc…), usually only require asmall workplace (such as a spare bedroom or a garage) from which administrative and preparatoryoperations can take place or where materials are stored. The money saved if these types of businessesdon’t pay rent can then be passed on to customers.For many entrepreneurs, however, being located in a convenient, well-travelled, public place thatcustomers can easily travel to is vital to business survival. This is because potential customers willusually forgo a business if it’s too far away or they’re forced to hunt for it. Equally as important is thatwhether a business is located in the middle of a city, the top right hand corner of a phonebook, or anInternet web page, a good location should always meet two important criteria:1. it should be visible and accessible and,2. it should require minimum decision-making on the part of the customer.Questions to Ask When Choosing a Business LocationThe first step in choosing a good business location is to identify the wants and needs of the desiredcustomer base. A location must then be found that meets these needs. For example, most businessesdependent on customer visits should be easily accessible by foot, public transportation, and cars.Questions than can help guide an entrepreneur through the criteria of a good location include:- Is the local economy growing?- Are building and construction on the increase?- Will the reputation or layout of the town or neighborhood help or hinder trade?- Will customers be driving their cars or walking?Most customers value ample parking space, proximity to public transportation routes, or sites thatpromote heavy pedestrian ‘walk-by’ traffic. Additionally, it should be determined if nearby businesseswill draw or repel the type of customer the business is seeking. Up-market restaurants, for example,have been known to do poorly when situated near churches, schools, graveyards, factories, orbusinesses that produce odors or noise. Likewise, retail operations may find it tough going in front offire hydrants or bus stops because these obstacles can hinder deliveries. The proximity of competitorsis another concern. Can your proposed business flourish next to a larger, flashier, and more costefficient operation? If not, perhaps it should be situated where it has a greater chance of succeeding.Additional considerations for choosing a good business location include:- The Local Job Market. If your business will rely on the employment of others, consider what typeof skills you’ll need (as well as the number of employees you’ll need) and find out if there arepeople that fit these requirements in your area. A location that has minimally qualified jobapplicants usually means that more money may have to be offered to attract suitable staff fromfar away. Remember, it’s not the fault of the town or area in which you’ve located if you can’tfind skilled employees.Chapter 7Chosing a LocationCommunity cannot long feed on itself, it canonly flourish with the coming of others…Howard Thurman46© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgChoosing a Location —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Home. Apart from possible tax advantages, operating out of a home is a good way to conservecash or allow for a bit of breathing space before a costlier, more expansive premise is acquired.Note, however, that planning or zoning permission may restrict customers from traveling to ahouse or apartment because many neighborhoods prohibit customer traffic in residential areas.Likewise, many neighborhoods ban the displaying of signs, which may be the only waycustomers can find your business. Check local laws before turning a spare bedroom into a workplace (which zoning restrictions may prohibit even if no customers will be visiting).- A Local Area may be more advantageous in contrast to setting up shop in another town or city.This is because community contacts are vital. Knowing the people in a local area helps form thenucleus of a customer base and may provide an additional edge with a local bank. Whether ornot you set up shop in a familiar or unfamiliar area, however, consider joining the local Chamberof Commerce, a nearby Visitor and Convention Bureau, a regional business association, a citycouncil committee, or some other local business organization. Several of the business ownersconsulted in the writing of this book stressed that the key to their success lay in networking withthese types of organizations.- City Centers offer a mixed bag of advantages and disadvantages. Advantages include possibleinexpensive rents or leases (perhaps due to the area being run-down), renovation possibilities(which could result in tax breaks), and accessibility to nearby businesses and workers.Disadvantages include lack of parking, possible shortened consumer shopping hours (mostpeople tend to leave city centers after their workday has ended), and building itself, which mayrequire renovation work.- Shopping Centers and Malls offer space that is usually rented (or leased) per square meter orsquare foot. Prices can range from the affordable (a few thousand dollars per year) to the veryexpensive (several hundred thousand dollars per year). Advantages include plenty of prearranged parking space, lots of walk-by trade, and a location close to businesses that draw inlike-minded customers (for example, clothing stores often do better when grouped with similarshops). The disadvantages of operating in a shopping mall or shopping center include unseenexpenses hidden in lease agreements (e.g.: heating, air-conditioning and ventilation costs,annual real estate tax assessments, monthly maintenance fees, and merchants association duesthat pay for shopping center promotion and event costs). Therefore, before moving into ashopping center or mall, read and understand the fine print on the lease agreement (see Leases,below). Further worries include the fact that in the USA, shopping malls have been closing at analarming rate due to the alarming number of retail bankruptcies and department storedownsizing. Green Street Advisors 2017 Mall Outlook estimates that more than 300 malls in theUSA will close over the next few years. That being said, some of these malls are now beingrepurposed and subdivided into thriving areas for smaller businesses. (Gustafson, 2017) Themessage: do proper research before investing in what could be a volatile location.- Stand-Alone Premises (defined as a free standing building that can be owned or leased) aresometimes less expensive than shopping center rents when it comes to monthly payments. Astand-alone structure may also provide the additional advantage of allowing an entrepreneur topurchase the property rather than lease it. For example, five or ten years of leased space in ashopping mall may total half a million dollars, which will never be seen again. Yet that sameamount of money invested in a mortgaged building may be returned in the future - along with aprofit – when the building is sold. As always, make sure a stand-alone structure has parkingavailability, is easy to find, and is close to customers. Additional concerns include checking toensure that the structure is sound and that the roof doesn’t leak – as well as determining if thereis ample electricity and wiring and adequate communication availability. (Author note: a formerstudent of mine almost went bankrupt when he discovered that the building he had justpurchased in Brazil to house his new business needed to be completely rewired in order to47© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgChoosing a Location —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessaccommodate the addition of numerous computers and other electronics; this resulted invisit from local authorities who stated that the interior sprinklers and exterior fire escapesalso had to be updated to fall in line with fire codes. Finally a new roof had to be installed tocarry the weight of a bigger air conditioning unit that was needed to offset the heatgenerated by the new computers and electronics).- Industrial Parks are ideal locations for warehouses or manufacturing centers that need access toconvenient transportation routes. Because industrial parks consist of many businesses placedtogether, they can also provide a leg-up on business networking. Some governments evensubsidize the costs of moving to, and working in, a local industrial park. Check local industrialreal estate offices for details.- Business Incubators are buildings that house several separate firms under one roof, therebyallowing expenses such as utilities, maintenance, receptionist duties and other services to beshared by several companies. Because local governments or business promotion agencies oftensubsidize business incubators, interested entrepreneurs should consult a local business realestate broker for more information.Learning about LeasesA business lease is a legal document that allows a company to conduct trade within a premises thatis owned by someone else. That someone else is called a landlord. Bear in mind that a landlord is abusinessperson. As such, he or she has an objective to make a profit based on supply and demand.Leases can involve any amount of time and money however they usually require a commitment ofthree to five years and are paid on a monthly basis. The terms of a lease should specify the methodand dates of payment, insurance needs, selling restrictions, and hours of operation.When confronted with a lease agreement, use a pencil to mark or circle anything that is notunderstood. Then have what you don’t understand explained by someone with expertise who has novested interest in the agreement (most experts advocate hiring an attorney for this purpose).Additional advice to consider before signing a lease includes:- Have the premises inspected by a licensed building inspector.- Check local demographics to ensure that they match the requirements of the business. Also,find out if any major construction, renovations, demolitions or other works will be done nearthe property at any time in the future. (Don’t ask the landlord. Instead, contact the city ortown council.)- Beware of lease percentage clauses that allow for a higher rent to be charged if the businessbrings in high profits.- Ensure that the lease includes an option to renew. A renew option allows a tenant to continuehis or her operations (without obligation) for a set period of time, at a previously agreed uponcost, when the original lease expires.- Determine what the landlord is responsible for. A turnkey lease may include fixtures, fittings,floor coverings, lighting, partitions, wall preparations, and regular repairs, which means a highermonthly fee. A regular lease may include nothing more than an agreed upon floor space (whichtranslates into higher out-of-pocket start-up expenses for the entrepreneur).- Find out beforehand if the premises can be used for other purposes. If you decide to makechanges in your business after a lease has been signed, you don’t want to be faced withlegal challenges.48© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgChoosing a Location — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- Don’t balk at paying a higher price for a good location. Check your budget and think in thelong-term. A cheaper lease or cheaper rent prices may mean fewer customers.- Customers instinctively avoid unkempt buildings as well as those that have a bad reputation orare in disrepair. Talk to neighbours or other tenants to determine if the building you’reinterested in is well maintained.- Visit the site you’re planning on leasing or buying at different times of the weekday and weekend(particularly at night) to see what goes on there. What you discover may surprise you.- Beware of ‘dead sites’ (areas that customers avoid for one reason or another). Dead sites existeven along popular streets and in successful shopping areas and shopping malls. Again, visit asite frequently and at all hours before you invest in it.- Ensure no legal actions are being taken against the holders of the building or premises you’reinterested in purchasing, renting, or leasing.- Consider setting up your business at a place where people have to stop and pause – such as apedestrian crossing, a bus stop, an intersection, or a parking area. This will ensure maximumvisibility.- Seek help before signing a lease. Spending money on professional advice may prevent spendinga lot more on rectifying problems that should have been avoided in the first place.- Before signing a lease or making a purchase, be sure the interior and exterior of a premises areup to local fire & safety (and other) codes and will support electrical, cooling, weight, and anyadditional needs of your business.49© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAn experienced entrepreneur in Nancy, France owns a business that sells neckties, scarves, shirts,cufflinks, pens, and pencils to private companies and associations. What makes her business unique isthat she can engrave the names and logos of her customers directly onto the merchandise she sells.Over the years she’s developed a good relationship with many of her suppliers, most of whom took along time to find. In fact, during the first year or two of operations she used to have her merchandiseengraved or embroidered by another company. Throughout this period she watched in exasperation asdeadlines weren’t met or design patterns didn’t come out quite the way she expected. One suppliershe used went bankrupt while she awaited an order. Bit by bit, however, she purchased her ownengraving, embroidery, and silk screen machines so she could perform all her own personalizing andavoid such problems. Experience taught her that buying unmarked products and engraving themherself is cheaper and easier (not to mention less frustrating) and generates greater profit margins.That being said, she fully understands that no business is an island. No matter how independent shewants to be she still must rely on a steady stream of manufacturers and suppliers to provide her withquality merchandise and materials in a timely and cost-efficient manner.Beginning the SearchWhether you’re seeking a service provider or a manufacturer that makes product components,made-to-order packaging materials, or ready-for-sale merchandise, finding a responsible andprofessional organization that provides exactly what is needed when it’s needed can be a lengthy andarduous task. Most experienced professionals insist that rushing this process almost always leads tofuture headaches, which is why taking the time to be thorough and selective is often recommended.‘Good contacts with suppliers are worth the effort,’ insists the owner of Maxi-Service Auto in Minsk,Belarus, ‘a first-rate supplier is not only someone you can rely upon, (he or she) can also suggest thingsyou never thought of or help explain matters no one else can’.Keep those words in mind when undertaking the following steps to track down a reputablemanufacturer or supplier (or distributor):1. Write down and define exactly what it is you need (i.e.: including all the components of theproduct you’re selling and its materials including the printing and packaging requirements,delivery requirements, and so on). Note that if your product and its packaging conform tostandard sizes it may save you money.2. Determine the minimum standard production run for the product (or its components). Forexample, most manufacturers only produce large quantities of whatever it is they make, whichvaries from producer to producer. It’s therefore quite possible to end up with 500 of one neededcomponent from a specialized supplier and 1,000 of a different component from anothersupplier. Prepare for this discrepancy.Hard work spotlights the character of people.Some turn up their sleeves, some turn uptheir noses, and some don’t turn up at all.Sam EwigChapter 8Finding a Manufacturer,Supplier,or Distributor50© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding a Manufacturer, Supplier or Distributor — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business3. Start searching for the names of manufacturers and suppliers. The best names usually comefrom referrals, but if a referral is not forthcoming check out:- the books and magazines listed in Chapter 5- the www.yellowpages.com website- the Encyclopedia of Associations (find an association that is related to whatever it is you need,contact it, and ask if it knows any good manufacturers or suppliers)- industry directories- trade journals- the Thomas Register of American Manufacturers- trade shows- the six-digit NAICS code (North American Industrial Classification System) of whatever it isthat’s needed. Every product and service category in Canada, Mexico, and the USA has anNAICS number assigned to it. Find this number at www.census.gov/naics and use it to locatesuppliers, manufacturers, and retailers of product or product components. The names andcontact details of the businesses listed will be classified under directories such as Standard andPoors, Dun & Bradstreet, or other reference sources available in local libraries. The Europeanversion of this system is called the Classification of Products by Activity (CPA).- ‘Green’ or environmental-based suppliers can be found on websites such as: www.letsgogreen.biz; www.thegreenguide.com; www.climatecounts.org; www.ecomall.com; www.greenhome.com.4. Contact interesting or reputable suppliers and start asking questions. If a supplier won’t answeryour questions then you’re speaking with the wrong one. Questions that need to be answeredinclude:- Are you licensed?- Do your materials and work practices meet state and federal requirements?- Are the materials you work with fire resistant, non-toxic, eco-friendly, etc?- Do you guarantee your work?- Will you supply credit references?- Can you produce a prototype or sample? If not, why not?- How much must I order and how much will it cost? (If the manufacturer has to outsource anorder, consider contacting the outsourcer directly. Most manufacturers charge a handling fee forwork that is contracted out.)- What are your payment terms?- While you manufacture my order - and if so do you charge for storage?- Do you work with a reliable shipper? Do they provide any discounts?- How can my production costs be lowered? (Most manufacturers can recommend differentassembly procedures, alternative materials, or a whole host of cheaper options if asked.)- How long will the order take to manufacture?- How long will it take to ship the order?- Will the order be insured?5. Manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors often use technical terms and industry specificationsthat are unfamiliar to the layperson. Don’t be intimidated. Learn the lingo as you go.6. Don’t be swayed by friendly salespeople or the fact that a supplier or distributor is convenientlylocated in your vicinity. Professionalism, reputation, and good service are far more importantthan proximity.51© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding a Manufacturer, Supplier or Distributor — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business7. If possible, visit a prospective supplier and speak to him or her in person. Ask for a tour of theoperation and learn how their company flows and performs. A lot will be learned this way andthe interest you show will probably be seen as flattering.8. Write the names of the best companies in preferential order. Check their credit references viathe Better Business Bureau (in the USA), the Better Payment Practice Group (in the UK), Dun &Bradstreet (in the USA) or a local bank to ensure that they aren’t in financial trouble. Ifreferences are unobtainable, be wary.9. Contact preferred candidates and start negotiating for lower prices, better delivery times, and/orbetter conditions. If you don’t ask for these specifics, you will never get them.10. Once an agreement has been reached, get everything in writing.Keeping Manufacturers, Suppliers, and DistributorsOnce honest and reliable suppliers or distributors have been found, move heaven and earth tocultivate and maintain a good relationship with them. The last thing a new business operator needs isfor the search to start all over again. Indeed, a good relationship with an astute supplier can oftenkeep a small business updated with the latest trends, services, and ideas, says the owner of SABatidecor in Ans, Belgium. With that in mind, following are a few suggestions for creating (andreaping) a long-lasting relationship with suppliers, manufactures, and distributors:- Pay on time. Paying on time builds goodwill and often allows for enhanced credit lines (whichmay come in handy in the future).- Ask for advice, suggestions, and opinions. Most knowledgeable manufacturers, suppliers, anddistributors have a lot of good ideas and are only too pleased to share them. Use thisinformation to your advantage.- Be generous with deadlines and avoid unreasonable demands.- Show loyalty.- If problems are encountered with an order, report them immediately in a calm and rationalmanner. Do not brush aside small discrepancies. Little problems can fester and grow intobruising conflicts.- In short, entrepreneurs should act with their suppliers and distributors the same way they wanttheir customers to treat them.Selecting an Overseas Manufacturer or SupplierTo keep costs down, many businesses buy direct from foreign companies to take advantage ofcheap labor or cheap raw materials. A good place to start looking for foreign suppliers is the Internet’slargest foreign manufacturing directory: www.alibaba.com. After a perspective company has beenpinpointed (using the same ‘Beginning the Search’ guidelines as above), contact your national embassyor consulate in the country where the company is located. The people that work in these offices mayhave vital information about the companies you wish to do business with. Basic concerns that willneed to be addressed include:- Quality issues and warranties (Are they different from what you expect or what your countryallows?).- The use (by the manufacturer) of substandard materials. (What costs will be incurred if youhave to return substandard materials or products to the foreign supplier?).- Transport and logistics costs.- Communication costs (mail, telephone, personal visits…).- Currency fluctuations and payment requirements.- The cost of inventory while in transit.52© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding a Manufacturer, Supplier, or Distributor — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Legal requirements and bureaucracy.- The potential risk of intellectual property infringement (i.e.: having ideas stolen)(For more information on dealing with overseas companies see Chapter 34).Advice from the Pros- Because of their size, small businesses often react faster and provide more personalized servicethan large companies. Therefore, keep an eye out for small businesses in your search forsuppliers.- Don’t let low prices be your ultimate determiner. Every supplier and distributor is entitled to aprofit and overall quality, consistency, and reliability are more important than the saving of a fewpennies.- Take the time to sit down, speak with, and listen to, salespeople. Not all salespeople are bad andthey just might be able to help you with what you’re looking for.- Communicate regularly with the people you do business with. Once you’ve found good contacts,regularly remind them of how much you enjoy their business by providing them with feedback.Only then can you expect the same in return.- Never stop looking for new manufacturers, new companies on the scene, new innovators, newideas, and new directions to go.- If your budget is not big enough to hire an employee who has the knowledge and skills that yourequire, consider bartering for what you need. (Author’s note: a golf course I once built for anemployer greatly benefited from the twice-a-week input of a man who was considered to be thenation’s best landscaper. The advice he gave, which most other people had to pay an arm and aleg for, was priceless - yet all he wanted in exchange for his services was a free club membershipwhich I was happy to provide.)- If a supplier or manufacturer can’t be found, consider this deficit as an opportunity to producewhatever it is you’re searching for.- Plan a trip to an industry trade show when looking for suppliers. You’ll be glad you did.53© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe term ‘business model’ first appeared in the 1950’s. It has since gradually gained favor andaccumulated many complex definitions in business literature and in the business academiccommunity. For the most part a business model refers to a workable business strategy or the way anorganization does business. A business model can therefore be based on a sales technique, a pricingstrategy, the wants and needs of a target market, or any method that offers a product or service in away that capitalizes on what the business does best and what customers want most. In a fast foodrestaurant this can translate into quick, one-on-one service (i.e.: taking and filling customer orders at acounter with the help of a displayed menu). In a retail business it could mean offering lower prices bycutting out a middleman. For manufacturers it might involve ceasing to think like a product seller andbecoming a service deliverer instead. Because business models and their success rates varyconsiderably, the trick behind choosing a successful model involves creating a complimentary salesoriented environment that correctly balances a product, the needs of its customers, and the businesswhere the product is made or sold (see Chapter 25 for information about competitive advantages).What’s Good for the Goose is Not Always Good for the GanderHow is an appropriate business model selected? Mostly through research followed by trial anderror. Research not only provides insight into the potential profitability of a product it can also pointout how a product can best achieve profitability. Trial and error involves bending and shaping ideasinto practice because when it comes to business models one size does not fit all. What works in onelocation or for one product or set of customers may not work for another. Put another way, goodproducts or services can (and do) fail if they aren’t offered to customers properly.Trying to Get It Right: The Paradox of Business Models(Author note: Big businesses are used as examples here because small business failures arenotoriously difficult to document. Most small business owners ‘disappear’ after their businesscollapse, and if they are found, and are willing to talk about what happened, they often blameeveryone and everything except themselves.)Sales Volume versus Profit MarginsWhich is more profitable: selling a product at a 30% mark-up or selling it at a 2% mark-up?Colombian born economist Bernardo Trujillo, who helped revolutionize the food industry in the1940’s and 1950’s, suggested the latter. Prior to this time, most food was sold in specialty shopswhere suppliers and retailers endeavored to keep prices artificially high. Furthermore, many retailerschose not to sell food because: (1) food could only be marked up a few percentage points (otherwise itwas seen as too expensive) and, (2) it had to be sold quickly or else it spoiled. The better option, itseemed, was to sell household wares, furniture, tools, clothing, and other non-perishables thatsupported profit margins or mark-ups of up to 40% or more.Bernardo Trujillo, however, reasoned that food had the potential to bring in more money thannon-perishable items because people have to eat every day. Percentages aren’t put into a bank, he said,only money is put into a bank. Put another way, tomatoes may only allow for a 2% mark-up, butunder the right conditions hundreds of tomatoes can be sold in a single day thereby generating a lot ofinstant cash. The same goes for bread, eggs, milk, and other grocery items. Although only a smallChapter 9Business ModelsWe choose our joys and sorrows longbefore we experience them..Kahlil Gibran54© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusiness Models —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessamount of money is made on each, a high volume of sales translates into higher profits. It was thisphilosophy that led to the modern day supermarket1, which, in turn, led to the creation of thehypermarket; these types of businesses operate under a model of buying in bulk, adding a low profitmargin, and aggressively selling as much as possible. Hence the adage, ‘Pile it high and sell it low’.Profit Margins versus Sales VolumeThe almost universal success of hypermarkets and supermarkets would seem to suggest that abusiness model based on buying merchandise in bulk and selling it cheaply is a sure-fire way tobusiness success. Unfortunately, business models aren’t quite as simple as that. For example, inJanuary of 2006 the executive in charge of Waterstone’s bookstores (based in the UK) handed in hisresignation after the company went from a £13.5-million profit to a £300,000 loss in just one year.Rather than admit any personal blame, the executive attributed his poor results to increasedcompetition from supermarkets and online retailers - not the price cuts and three-for-two offers hehad initiated to maximize sales (in some cases, discounts of up to 60% to 70% were offered tocustomers). Meanwhile, W H Smith (which is the main rival of Waterstone’s) posted an impressiveprofit of £80-million. The chief executive of W H Smith attributed the company’s success to refusingto sell merchandise cheaply - insisting that higher price margins are more lucrative than high salesvolumes.So much for piling it high and selling it low.High Prices versus Low PricesIt’s commonly assumed that low prices always attract customers and high prices turn them away(rich folks love low prices and poor folks need them, declares one old maxim). Yet according toLondon-based personal growth consultants PTI International, on average, the higher a business’s pricesare the less customers tend to object (the rationale is that most people believe price to be directlycommensurate with value). Small firms need to wise up, says PTI International, because largebusiness customers have no scruples when it comes to exploiting the commercial naiveté endemic insmall businesses. PTI goes on to claim that its clients have boosted their annual turnover by as muchas a quarter of a million dollars by quoting higher prices to new customers. If you aren’t getting priceobjections from your customers, PTI continues, you’re under-selling yourself. Of course this begs thequestions: (1) Do you have what it takes to charge exorbitant prices? (2) Will your customers paythem? and (3) Is your product, or service of high enough quality to justify a higher price?Market Share versus ProfitabilityThe legendary South African retail chain Pick ‘n Pay began its climb to superstar status in 1967 withfour corner markets located in Cape Town. Thirty-eight years later those four shops grew into 273supermarkets and hypermarkets as well as 176 franchised stores that employ over 30,000 people. Thekey to Pick ‘n Pay’s success, says company chairman Raymond Ackerman, is placing profitability overmarket share. Ackerman’s argument is that too many growing businesses work tirelessly to acquiremarket share by building or buying more outlets. By contrast, Ackerman didn’t care how many storeshe had so long as each and every one of them made a profit. As a result, Pick ‘n Pay went roaring aheadin profitability (and growth) while its nearest rival went steadily downhill on an endless chase aftermarket share. Ironically, Ackerman also admits that the reason why Pick ‘n Pay failed in its attempt toexpand into Australia was because he was only able to open one store – which didn’t garner enoughmarket share to remain profitable. Such is the paradox of business.The concept of one stop food shopping began, and failed, in America in 1896 with Frank Munsey and his chain of Mohican outlets. Fifteen yearslater, Piggly Wiggly reintroduced the concept more successfully. The practice of selling different goods under one roof took time to develop becausesuppliers and retailers, often with government help, fought to keep prices high. Eventually, however, prices dropped thanks, in part, to bulk buyingand selling. In Europe, French firms Carrefour and Auchan pioneered the supermarket concept. In Britain, Tesco, Marks & Spencer’s, and Sainsbury’sled the way. In Australia, Coles benchmarked the idea and in South Africa it was Pick ‘n Pay. Hypermarkets (giant superstores that sell food andnon-perishables) were pioneered by French firms Carrefour and Euromarche and copied by Pick ‘n Pay. Later, American entrepreneur Sam Waltonvisited South Africa, toured several Pick ‘n Pay outlets, and returned to America where he used the ideas he saw to enhance his (then) small chain ofWal-Mart stores.55© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusiness Models — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessLess Choice versus More ChoiceCustomers want more choice. The more choice the happier the customer - or at least that’s theconventional wisdom. Some years ago I was named as the manager of a business that offered dozensof local and international travel tours amongst its services. Local tours did well, but year after year theglobal destination packages never seemed to interest anyone. Time and again my employees thoughtup ever more exciting trips - each more exotic than the last - but every planned overseas excursionultimately ended up attracting so few clients that it had to be cancelled. Where were we going wrong?To make a long story short, we reduced the number of international trips from twelve to three – andwatched with astonishment as they quickly filled up with customers. It turned out that by offering toomany choices we were baffling our clients and spreading our product line too thinly. We learned thehard way that sometimes less really is more.Competition versus CooperationOne of the oldest axioms in any business book is the capitalistic notion of survival-of-the-fittest. Ina free market economy it’s claimed that competition helps produce strong, lean businesses thatfacilitate quality and ensure low prices. Yet if that’s true, why did automakers Toyota, Peugeot, andCitroen join together in the Czech Republic to develop a new car currently being sold by each under itsown brand name? Likewise, why do dozens of tour-related business across the Australian outbacknow help one another rather than compete against each other (which is what they used to do)? Theanswer lies in the concept of cooperative networking – the act of sharing ideas, comparing problems,and forming partnerships to enhance business enterprise. For as long as people have been trading andcompeting there have been cooperative efforts by astute business people to try and complement oneanother rather than slug it out in the marketplace. For example, working with a competitor can help abusiness reduce costs (particularly those of a new start-up), achieve advantages in scale and speed,enhance competitiveness, create new capital, and stimulate new business opportunities by conductingjoint purchases, sharing resources, merging employee training programs, and much more. What doesthis mean to the entrepreneur looking for a profitable business model? When conducting marketresearch, don’t just look at the size and scope of the market you wish to enter. Also size up thecompetition and consider ways your business can fit in amongst it. (For more on this topic seeChapter 32)Lean Thinking versus Business as UsualOne way businesses can reduce costs and overheads is through the maniacal elimination of waste inall its forms - a concept pioneered by Henry Ford and improved upon by the Toyota automotivecompany. In its early days, Toyota preached that maximizing production capacity (i.e.: making asmuch of a product as possible) is almost always a mistake. Instead, the company advocated findingout what its customers wanted (including the amount they wanted) and providing only that.Everything else was considered a waste of time, money, and resources. The Dell computer companysuccessfully entered a crowded (and growing) market with this concept. As journalist ThomasFriedman describes in his book The World is Flat, Dell succeeds because it manufactured a product afterit received a customer order. This means that Dell had a paying customer for every computer it madebefore that computer was manufactured. Dell therefore had no expensive inventory of computers nor,at first, did it own any retail outlets. One of the company’s few production expenses involvesmaintaining a supply of computer parts, but these parts can be used in a variety of configurations soeach part is always used sooner or later. Most importantly, Dell never got stuck with an unsoldproduct because in the first years of operation only what was needed by a customer was ever actuallymade. ‘To hell with your competitors,’ say the authors of the book Lean Thinking (Womack & Jones,1996). ‘Compete against perfection instead by identifying all activities that are wasteful (i.e.: those notdirectly servicing customers) and eliminating them.’ The result is a business that caters solely tocustomer wants and needs rather than wasteful practices.56© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusiness Models —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessSelling versus Sales and ServiceIn 1989 and 1997, the Boeing aircraft company tried unsuccessfully to keep up with a deluge oforders. When it found that it couldn’t, several orders had to be cancelled, which did not make itscustomers happy. Paradoxically, in 1993 and 1998, the company had laid-off workers because of adecrease in orders. This boom-and-bust cycle is typical for many businesses and industries, say PaulHawken, Amory Lovins, and Hunter Lovins (authors of the book Natural Capital), but such cycles canbe smoothened if turning a product into a service is added to the mix. For example, during tougheconomic times companies and consumers usually avoid making expensive product purchases, yet thebenefit these products provide may still be needed. As Swiss ‘product-to-service’ pioneer Walter Stahelexplains, most buyers seek the benefit a product provides, not necessarily the product itself. Takingthis into account, the Dow Chemical company now enjoys an extensive business turning its chemicalproducts (many of which are toxic or flammable) into a service instead of selling the chemicals. Sellingchemicals leaves customers with unwanted safety, handling and disposal responsibilities. Through aservice arrangement, however, Dow sells only what a paying customer needs, which is what itschemicals do. Dow performs the application and then cleans everything up. Afterward, it takes theused chemicals back to its factory to recycle and repackage them for the next job. In other words, Dowmakes money by repeatedly selling the same raw materials, and saves money because it requires fewerraw materials (which is good for the environment). Customers love the arrangement because theyonly expenses incurred are for the benefit they want. With a little imagination, product-to-servicethinking can be used in almost any industry. For example, in the Netherlands the photochemicalindustry leases out its chemicals and collects them afterward for reuse. In Switzerland, the Schindlerelevator company leases a ‘people moving’ service in addition to selling its products to those who wantto own them. Xerox operates a similar ‘benefit only’ service as does an industrial furnace manufacturerin England and the Pitney Bowes postage meter company (to name but a few). Rather thanmanufacture large quantities of a product in the hope that it sells, businesses that sell a benefit, (1)focus on what customers want, (2) extend the life of their products and raw materials through optimalre-use and maintenance, (3) control waste and costs, and, (4) minimize financial risk. Moreover,adding a service facet to a product portfolio creates jobs, provides employees with more skills and jobsecurity, and smoothens slow economic periods when sales traditionally decrease. For more about thisconcept and similar business models, please download our free book The Sustainable BusinessPersistence versus Stubbornness (or Knowing When to Stop and Change)Enterprises that stick to a business model which is wrong for a product or customer base can findthemselves going out of business very quickly. Experienced practitioners suggest that entrepreneursshould change and try a new approach before the worst happens, as the following case studiesillustrate:Example 1. In the 1980’s, the Coca-Cola Company decided to change its centuries-old formula. The$4-million in research that led to this decision resulted in a product called ‘New Coke’. Unfortunately,the company’s research failed to consider the loyalty that customers held for the old formula and thebusiness ended up losing market share and millions of dollars in revenue as a result. Eventually,Coca-Cola reinstated its old formula to appease its customer base, but not before millions of dollarshad been wasted trying to convince customers that they were wrong and the company’s flawedresearch was right.Example 2. Ray Kroc, the legendary owner of McDonalds, took a handful of California burger standsand turned them into a global conglomerate. Throughout his years as chairman, however, he wasnotorious for coming up with new menu items that failed miserably. Indeed, it’s been said that justabout every food idea he came up with proved to be a loser. Fortunately, Kroc harbored two powerfulbusiness strengths: (1) he knew when to cut his losses (something few business people seem to be ableto do) and, (2) he graciously learned to accept ideas he was initially dead set against, but which proved57© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusiness Models —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessto be profitable. For example, Kroc hated the notion of selling a two-tiered hamburger called the ‘BigMac’ – until the defiant franchise owner who came up with the idea went ahead and started selling itagainst Kroc’s orders. Immediately the Big Mac proved to be a virtual license to print money – andjust as quickly Kroc changed his mind and welcomed it with open arms. Kroc may not have beengifted when it came to inventing products, but he certainly knew when to put aside his ego and focuson making money (Mingo, 1994).Example 3. For years the American public snubbed Automated Teller Machines (or cash-points)because most people preferred conducting their banking transactions with a live human being. Then amassive snowstorm in New York shut the city down and the benefit of obtaining money at any hourbecame quickly apparent. The Citicorp bank pounced on this opportunity by launching a series ofquickly-put-together television ads that showed a beleaguered customer in a snowstorm collectingcash from an ATM while those around him, who were equally in need of cash, looked on helplessly.What this all means is that contrary to conventional wisdom sometimes a company can sell what itwants to sell rather than what customers want to buy – if its timing and the circumstances are right.Example 4. Most people seem to forget that computers were once relegated almost solely toaccounting departments, universities, and the workbenches of computer nerds because they were toocomplicated to operate. Then Apple computer designed an easy-to-use point-and-click program(complete with an innovate tool called a ‘mouse’) that made computing accessible to everyone. As aresult, businesses that had refused to embrace the promise of computer technology (IBM being themost obvious example) suffered serious setbacks as smaller companies rushed in to fill the void. Themessage is that new ideas, new business models, new technologies, new production methods, and newsales techniques, can render almost any product, service, or business practice either obsolete - orprofitable – very quickly. Constant vigilance is the key factor here.Example 5. Mohammad Yunus was a college professor in Bangladesh who spent years trying todetermine what poor people needed to help lift them out of poverty. His research showed that mostpoor folks know exactly what they need: a tool, a raw material, or some other basic requirement thatcan help them to help themselves. Unfortunately, most of the world’s poorest people do not have thefew dollars necessary to buy what they need so Yunus conceived of an idea to offer small ‘micro-credit’loans. Defying the naysayers, he then developed a business model around the idea of bringing hisloaning institution (the Grameen Bank) to his customers rather than forcing his customers to come tohis bank. Today, the Grameen Bank pays out over $445-million each year to over 3 million needypeople (usually in sums of $25 per customer). To date, these loans have achieved a 98.9% customerrepayment rate – higher than any other bank in the world. As a result, in 2006, Mohammad Yunuswon the Nobel Peace Prize; proving that a good business idea combined with a well thought outcustomer-oriented business model really pays off. Kiva.com is a similar example of this concept.There are No Guarantees in BusinessRemember, although research can help choose a good business model, research alone will notguarantee success. Equally as frustrating, no matter how promising, convenient, or inexpensive a newproduct or service may be, it may require both the patience of Job and a Herculean effort beforepaying customers respond to its advantages. Remaining ever vigilant is an imperative because onetiny, unforeseen ‘twist’ or product modification devised by you or a competitor may be all that’sneeded to make a current product idea wildly successful (see Chapter 25) - or instantly out of date.The message for entrepreneurs (as always) is to remain informed, flexible, and attuned to changingenvironments, changing product perceptions, and changing customer wants and needs.58© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBusiness Models —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- Don’t be a fool when it comes to persistence. Practice does not make perfect if you’re practicingthe wrong tactic. If what you’re doing is not working, stop doing it and try something else.- Know what and why you’re changing before taking a different course.- Although change is constant and necessary, make sure you understand the reasons behind it. Becertain that you’ve chosen the right time to change and have made enough of a commitmentbefore doing so. Some ideas need a long time (and a great deal of patience and support) beforethey payoff.- Work smart, not just hard. Re-working a business plan is not a sign of weakness if the currentplan is proving futile.- Don’t try to play it safe by adopting several types of business models when running a business.Businesses that try to be all things to all people have a tendency to be confused, unfocused, andsloppy and end up satisfying no one.- Don’t be afraid to do exactly the opposite of what everyone else is doing. Customers are usuallyattracted to the differences a business offers rather than the similarities it shares with others. Ifcost-cutting is the norm in your area, think about breaking into the luxury end of the market. Ifa market is saturated with providers that sell similar products, then embellish what you offerwith unbeatable service and delivery.- Never assume that a successful business strategy will last forever. It won’t.59© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEntrepreneurship statistics often vary. Some estimates claim that up to 95% of new businesses failwithin five years. Others say the number is around 65%. Either way, these are staggering figureswhen one takes into account that most new businesses fail for more or less the same reasons. Most ofthese reasons are presented below ranked in the order of the threat they pose according to theentrepreneurs surveyed for this book. Note, however, that those placed at the end of the list are notthe least dangerous. ‘Any one of them, combined with another or on its own, carries enough firepowerto bring down a business,’ says the owner and operator of ASAP UK Ltd. (a sign making and print shopin Southampton, England). It therefore makes sense to do as much as possible to avoid all of them.Reason 1: Inadequate PlanningAs simple as it sounds, lack of forethought and planning is the main culprit behind virtually everybusiness failure. Thankfully, 75% of most business ideas fail on paper (i.e.: the planning stage), whichis exactly where a business idea should fail. The only other option is to collapse on the street, perhapsunder a pile of debt. Inadequate planning includes (but is not limited to), not fully understanding aproduct or service before selling it, not conducting detailed market or labor research, not compiling arealistic customer profile, not researching the competition, not selecting a proper business model, notdetermining all costs beforehand, or, in general, not doing enough preliminary work to determine if allthe numbers add up. In short, running a business without a well-researched plan is like hackingthrough a jungle without a map. Put another way, if you don’t have the time or inclination to plan,write down, investigate, and analyze what it is you want to do in regards to starting a business, thenyou probably don’t have what it takes to succeed. Period. For further information on this criticalsubject, see Chapter 11.Reason 2: Underestimating the Commitment it Takes to SucceedIn a world where almost everything is wanted on a silver platter the moment it’s demanded, it’seasy to forget that quality and strength take time to acquire. For example, it can take up to six monthsor longer to put together a business plan and as much as five to seven years (or longer) to establish asolid customer base. I’ll use the story of the photocopier to illustrate this point. The idea ofphotocopying text instead of making copies by hand was the brainchild of Chester Carlson, a visionarywho developed his first successful machine-made ‘dry writing’ image in 1939. Over the years Carlsonoffered his idea to over 20 companies including GE, IBM, and Kodak, yet each turned the inventiondown by explaining that photocopiers weren’t needed because carbon paper was good enough. Muchto his credit, Carlson persisted - eventually winning over the president of a small photographic papercompany (Joe Wilson) who agreed to fund the development of what he saw as a promising new idea.Through thick and thin Mr. Wilson kept his word, faithfully supporting Carlson even when he couldnot afford to do so. At one point, during the winter of 1959-1960, a team of engineers worked 24hours a day, seven days a week to meet a deadline. With Wilson and Carlson unable to pay the heatingbills, the men huddled around the prototype as they worked, wearing coats and boots (and with aChapter 10The 13 Main Reasons Why NewBusinesses Fail (and How toPrevent Them)Chance fights ever on the side of the prudent..Euripides60© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessblanket draped over themselves and the machine) in order to keep warm. The result was the launch ofXerox, a company that reached $1-billion in sales faster than any other business in history up to then.It took over 20 years and brought several people to the brink of financial ruin, but persistence,dedication - and a good idea - paid off. For a reminder of the human and commercial aspects of theseconcepts, re-read Chapters 1-9. Chapters 11-20 provide additional supplementary information on thebasics behind foundation building.Reason 3: Cash Flow ProblemsIf passion, commitment, and planning are more important than money (as stated in Chapter 1),then why do cash flow problems appear at the top of a ‘reasons why business fail’ list? Think of it thisway: money isn’t needed to conceive a baby, but once a baby is born it needs to be fed – and the biggera baby gets the more food it needs. So it is with a business. Too many entrepreneurs confuse theword cash with the word profit, thinking that they’re one and the same. ‘Profit’ is a word foraccountants. ‘Cash’ is what a business feeds on in order to survive. Employees, banks, and manysuppliers must be paid in cash – not profit percentages. If customers take 30 days, 60 days, 90 days,or longer to make their payments, a business could be in trouble if it needs those payments to coverexpenses. One of the most difficult things to explain to wannabe entrepreneurs is that profitablebusinesses all too often end up going bust due to cash problems because much of the world runs oncredit. Even a business with $20-million in sales can face bankruptcy if it can’t meet its paymentobligations while waiting for customers to pay for what they purchased. Suggestions for improvingcash flow include:- Don’t go on a spending spree during the first year or two of operations. No matter how successfulyour business appears, or how enthusiastic you are to make improvements, the first year ofoperations is not the best time to spend money. It’s the time for collecting money. Avoid thetemptation to celebrate or spend a lot of money during the first year or two of operations.- Avoid bad customers. Before accepting credit from anyone, ask for and check credit references.Some banks will do this for you. Or try an internet search. In the UK, the Better PaymentPractice Group (BPPG) names and shames 10,000 delinquent payment companies on its website.The worst offender on its 1999 list was WorldCom – a company that took 256 days on average topay its suppliers and went bankrupt three years later (Simms, 2006). In the USA, contact Dun &Bradstreet for a quote. Note: Credit-checking services are available in most countries so takeadvantage of them!- Bill promptly. When possible, always ask for cash up front when selling a product or service.Otherwise, set up a regular billing system, clearly state your terms, or negotiate with customersfor payment in advance.- Create an incentive for receiving prompt payments. Offering customers a discount of 1% or 2% ifthey pay within ten days often provides a big incentive for them to do so.- Reduce inventory. Determine how much inventory your business really needs and cut back onstock. Reducing the amount of money you spend on inventory frees up capital.- Consolidate your loans. If you’ve borrowed money from several different sources, consider takingout one big loan that covers them all. This may involve stretching out your payments foranother year or two (thereby costing more in the long run), but if you need to lower yourmonthly expenditures it may be a good option.- Learn to barter. Sometimes products or services can be exchanged without money changinghands. For example, many years ago I convinced a gym owner to expand his hours of operationby bringing in students that needed to do internships. Local university rules forbid the payingof interns so any company that ‘hired’ one received free labor in return for providing the studentwith some work experience. Ten years later, I expanded this idea to rescue a multi-million dollarequestrian operation located in the Middle East. After advertising for, and finding, a number of61© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessvolunteers who were qualified to give riding lessons I set-up a profitable program that allowedthese volunteers (none of whom could afford their own horse) to ride a horse whenever theywanted in exchange for teaching my customers how to ride (this also reduced the amount oftime and money that had to be spent exercising horses). As a result I never had to pay myinstructors a wage, they brought in loads of new customers, and the business became profitablein six months.For further information on cash flow problems and solutions, consult Chapters 12 and 13.Reason 4: Poor ManagementEntrepreneurship is the death of management. Paradoxically, it’s also been said that managementis the death of entrepreneurship. What these comments refer to is the belief that after setting up abusiness too many entrepreneurs stiffen into rigid managers that are guided by routines - a problemthat probably arises due to the fact that most people don’t know what good management is about. Inshort, management is not about being a boss. Good management is about serving others: providingfor others, motivating people, getting work done through others, and streamlining a business towardmaking a sale -- and that’s just the beginning. Indeed, some practitioners believe that managers indenial of what’s going on in their business is the real number one reason why most businesses fail.Additional managerial problems include an inability to delegate, inflexibility, micro-managing thework of others, or abdicating important work responsibilities.Fortunately, it doesn’t take genius to be a good manager. For the most part, competentmanagement involves being curious and open-minded, having a good attitude, adopting adequateorganization skills, offering quality training to employees, listening to others, being flexible to newideas (i.e.: remaining entrepreneurial), harboring a hatred of the status quo, and instilling a businesswith a can-do attitude that may involve breaking the rules (but not the law). For further suggestionson the basics of management consult Chapter 21.Reason 5: Not Understanding the Importance of CustomersSetting up a new business involves so much work that it’s easy to forget about paying customers.Interior design, bookkeeping, product displays and other non-revenue producing activities - althoughimportant - should not be the priority of a business. Successful business operations are reliant uponreceiving money from satisfied customers on a regular basis. Yet no matter how simple this conceptsounds, it’s surprising how many businesses lose sight of it. For example, years ago a wealthy doctorwanted to purchase industrial-size washing machines and dryers for the hospitals he owned. Heapproached me for help, but I didn’t have any free time so I referred him to my father, a retiredexecutive who is always looking for something to do. ‘Over the past month I’ve contacted everywashing machine manufacturer in the country,’ he told me later, ‘but no one seems able to answereven my most basic questions, my messages aren’t being returned, and I’m tired of begging.’What is it that causes people to lose sight of the fact that to make money and survive a businessmust focus on its customers? For answers to this question please turn to Chapters 20, 21, and 22.Reason 6: Staffing ProblemsPeople problems usually begin by: (1) not fully investigating the background of job applicants, (2)failing to fully train employees, (3) hiring friends and relatives (in a long-term capacity), and (4)employing people who are clones of the entrepreneur rather than those whose skills willcounterbalance the entrepreneur’s weaknesses.No matter what the business, finding honest workers who share the owner’s passion andcommitment can be an arduous and time-consuming process. To be sure, almost every small businesshas, at one time or another, been forced to hire the first breathing job applicant that appeared in thedoorway. That being said, it is possible to entice capable people into joining an organization because it,or the person behind it, impresses them. Don’t be the type of boss whose behavior resulted in a62© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessprospective employee leaving his or her last job (‘Though we are supposedly living in a democracy,most of us spend our lives working in private tyrannies,’ says business writer John Emerson). As anentrepreneur, you may not be able to pay your employees more than your competitors, but you cancertainly give them more. Employees should be trained properly and be made to feel useful becausepeople work harder and show more commitment when they feel that they belong to an organizationand are being listened to. In any business, employees come and go for any number of reasons, but itonly makes sense to try and keep the good ones for as long as possible; high employee turnover isexpensive, time consuming, and draining.For many small businesses the process of finding good employees begins by placing a classified adin a newspaper or magazine, by sticking a ‘help wanted’ sign in a window, or, by pinning a notice onthe bulletin board of a community center, supermarket, or similar venue. This obviously doesn’t allowfor any screening to take place, but it can result in a larger number of potential candidates from whichto choose. Employment agencies are another option (although their services may be expensive).Colleges, universities, and high schools provide an additional hunting ground particularly when itcomes to part-time help. Don’t forget to ask friends and business contacts if they know of anyonelooking for work - just be firm in insisting that the people you’re seeking must be qualified. Rememberto keep a file of all candidates. You may need it in the future.Before a candidate has been selected, check his or her background. Any claims made on a resumeshould also be investigated. This will save a lot of time, money, and hassle. Plan the interview processin advance, prepare a list of questions, and try to determine how ‘hungry’ the candidate is to work. I,and others, have found many excellent employees by focusing on their desire to work rather than theireducation and experience. People who are hungry for work are usually committed and want to do well.Again, the more time and effort spent on finding and screening job applicants, the less chance therewill be of suffering through the nightmare of staffing problems. For more information on this subjectturn to Chapters 20, 21, 22, and 31.Reason 7: InflexibilitySmall businesses should not act like rigid, inflexible corporations. From the business plan to themarketing campaign to the importance of finalizing a sale, if something isn’t right it should bechanged quickly. Change can happen in one of two ways: it can either be done by you or it can be usedto run over you. Keep in mind the definition of insanity (the constant repetition of a behavior with theexpectation of a different result) and the perils of inflexibility become more obvious. Persistence is anadmirable trait, but when it turns into stubbornness it can lead to trouble. Examples of inflexibility ina business include not deferring to customer demands, feeling invincible against competitors, andrefusing to acknowledge changes in technology, markets, or work practices. Simply put, the role of abusiness is to sell what customers want to buy, not what the business wants to sell (and selling whatcustomers want includes how, when, and where the customer wants the product sold). For example,many years ago I worked for a fitness club that decided to adopt a direct debit billing format. At thetime direct debit was a new concept and many customers were reluctant to authorize an automaticmonthly deduction of fees from their bank accounts. One day a man came in to buy a year’smembership for his son. As I began to explain our direct debit policy, he pulled out a wad of cash. ‘I’dlike to pay with this if you don’t mind,’ he said. At that moment the club’s manager walked by. ‘Whatare you doing?’ he bellowed, ‘I’ve said 100 times that customer payments can only be made by directdebit!’ Of course the customer left. Needless to say, the business collapsed soon afterwards. Yearslater I found myself in England joining a local gym. ‘Would you like me to pay by cash, cheque, orcredit card?’ I asked. ‘Yes, yes, or yes,’ the owner cheerfully replied, ‘whatever’s convenient for you.’Now that’s good business! For further insight on the importance of being flexible see Chapters 3, 5, 6,9, 21, and 22.63© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessReason 8: Poor Marketing and/or an Inability to SellContrary to popular belief, if you build a better mousetrap the world will not beat a path to yourdoor. Equally as true is that good products and services do not sell themselves. Simply put, thesuccess of every enterprise hinges on its ability to sell – and an ability to sell begins by understandingthe basics of marketing, promotion, and human psychology. Additional problems associated withpoor marketing and selling include relying too much on one particular customer, not focusing on aparticular market segment, not undergoing sales training, and ignoring the competition (everybusiness is always competing against something – even if it’s just a customer’s time). To remainsolvent, a business must be able to successfully:- announce to potential customers what is being sold,- generate continuous interest and excitement in what is being sold, and,- finalize a sale before a competitor takes it away.Don’t sell yourself short. For more information on this crucial subject see Chapters 18, 23, 24, 25,27, 28, and 29.Reason 9: Not Enough Capital.Too many new business owners underestimate how much money they need. Not to get theirbusiness off the ground, but to keep it running through the first year or so of operations when moneyis tight. That’s not to say that buckets of money are needed to succeed as an entrepreneur. Forexample, one entrepreneur in the USA made a tidy profit writing and selling a small booklet thecontained recipes for 100 different meals made with ground beef. Another American entrepreneursold fishing lures by doing little more than advertising in a sports journal. For one dollar and the costof postage, readers were asked to send in an unlucky lure for which they would receive a different lurein reply. The scheme was nothing more than a used product swap yet no one complained and itproduced a small profit (Halloran, 1992).Unfortunately, most businesses need more than a few recipes or a fishing lure to get started. Youmay recall that the first chapter of this book claims that passion and commitment are more importantthan money when it comes to starting a business. According to many practitioners this is true,however, it’s also true that most businesses don’t make any money during their first year or two ofoperations. Funding is therefore needed to cover taxes, wages, raw materials and other costs, as wellas the personal requirements of the owner (e.g.: food, medical insurance, a mortgage (or rent), carexpenses, and so on). With this in mind, many successful entrepreneurs suggest pursuing severalsources of finance rather than just one (which could dry up). If possible, they also suggest trying tocollect an additional three to six months worth of extra working capital to put aside for emergencies.‘If your business idea needs a lot of money to get started then you’re probably thinking too big,’ saysone millionaire, ‘consider starting out smaller.’ For further details see Chapters 12 and 13.Reason 10: Pricing ProblemsThe price of a product is usually the most significant factor affecting a customer’s decision as towhether or not the product will be bought. Equally as true is that a price contains the profit a businesshopes to make. Entrepreneurs want to make as much money as they can while customers want tosave as much money as possible. Unfortunately, it’s the entrepreneur that usually loses this struggle.In a bid to attract customers, the most common pricing mistake made by new businesses (especiallyservice providers) is to undercharge or give away labor or materials to attract customers. Yet once aproduct has been dispensed for free the business no longer has any leverage to collect payment.Another factor that must be considered when establishing a good price is the amount of time, work,and effort invested in the product or service. Setting a price involves much more than coveringexpenses or charging what everyone else is charging. For a broad explanation of the factors involvedand how they can be optimized to suit the needs of a business, see Chapter 27.64© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessReason 11: Lack of a Competitive EdgeMany small businesses starts out as a cutout copy of another business, thereby providing noincentive for customers to choose it over the available competition. Every enterprise should thereforehave at least one aspect that distinguishes it from its competitors. Domino’s Pizza, for example, madeits name by focusing on fast deliveries - something few other pizza parlors provided at the time. DellComputer stays at, or near, the top of its market by manufacturing a personalized product faster thanany other computer company in the market. How do businesses like these become unique – and howcan yours? The ‘Marketing Mix’ elements discussed in Chapter 24 provide a good starting point.Garvin’s ‘Eight Quality Dimensions’ in Chapter 26, combined with a thorough understanding of thewants and needs of customers, can also be of help. For more information on how to obtain acompetitive edge, re-examine Chapters 3, 23, 25, 27, and 31.Reason 12: Going it AloneAlong with not doing enough research and not establishing a close relationship with customers (aswell as suppliers), going it alone means relying totally on your own, infallible, all-knowing and superiorintellect. Put another way, so many qualified people, books, education centers, and governmentprograms are available to help entrepreneurs that it simply doesn’t make sense to venture into themarketplace alone. If help is needed it should be asked for. The economic strength of a nation is oftenreflected in the ease or difficulty with which a citizen can start a business. That’s why it can takethousands of dollars, hundreds of pages of forms, and more than a year of effort to register a businessin many developing countries. Developed countries, on the other hand, make the process easier. Inthe UK, check the phonebook or the Internet to find the location of the nearest Training and EnterpriseCouncil or small business information center. In France, contact the Pret a la Creation d’Enterprise(PCE). In Mexico, the First Contact Entrepreneurial Advisory Centre and CONTACTO pyME are availableto help entrepreneurs. Belgium has a program that actually gives money to entrepreneurs to help starttheir own business (contact the Foundation for Research and Education in Entrepreneurship, or FREE, fordetails). Likewise, Europeans can seek out nearby SOLVIT Centers, which are located across thecontinent. In the Netherlands, entrepreneurs can make inquiries through TAOM, a program thatoffers technical assistance. In the USA, the Small Business Administration (SBA) provides help to localbusinesses. The Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), an offshoot of this program, is yet anotherassistance venue. Small Business Development Centers (SBDC), many on the campuses of colleges anduniversities, provide an additional alternative. Business schools, universities, city halls, communitycenters, trade associations, and books make for further sources of information – and don’t forget thelocal Chamber of Commerce. The seminars, guidance, training, and pamphlets these organizations offerare bound to suit the needs of almost any entrepreneur.Reason 13: Growing Too FastAs odd as it may sound, having too many customers can kill a business. Think of it this way: if abusiness is swamped with increasing customer orders it has to increase its output, which means that ithas to purchase more raw materials, buy more equipment, and possibly hire more personnel.Meanwhile the business is stuck producing the same output until it has the full ability to do more. Inother words, expenses soar while revenues stay the same. This lack of incoming cash and increasingdebt can result in big problems – and not just financial ones. When a business can’t deliver what itpromises word of mouth spreads and customers quickly go elsewhere. Research has shown that happycustomers tell three to four people about their experience while unhappy customers relay theirdisgruntlement to as many as 20 people. It is therefore prudent for business operators to have anadequate plan that takes into account what will be done to increase output or expand operations beforethe business starts growing. For example, one restaurateur discovered that the only way he couldplacate his growing number of customers - most of whom he had to turn away - was to offer free wineand appetizers while they stood in line. His next step was to initiate a table-booking system that65© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe 13 Main Reasons Why New Businesses Fail (and How to Prevent Them) — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessdidn’t offend his regular customers. In the meantime, he made plans to borrow money, expand hispremises, and hire and train new employees. There is simply no other way to put it: growingbusinesses usually have to take on some form of structured debt in order to cover their expenses. SeeChapter 12 for ideas on how outside funding can be obtained.Advice from the Pros- The 13 Reasons Why Business Fail should be addressed in every business plan. Don’t ignore them.- It’s not necessary to know everything there is to know about a business before starting one,however, it is necessary to learn as much as possible. Don’t think that the law of business failureaverages does not apply to you. Familiarize yourself with the basics of business, as well as theall-too-common mistakes others make, before taking the leap into a new business venture.- In addition to the 13 Reasons Why Businesses Fail, a few other factors can just as easily wipe outan unprepared beginner (most of which fall under the category of poor management or lack ofplanning). Be familiar with them. They include:• Procrastination with decision making and/or the initiation of changes,• Failing to respond to competitors,• Not understanding the competition and why it either succeeds or fails• Not adapting to a changing market• Failing to prepare for the inevitability of traditionally volatile costs (fuel, raw materials, insurance,labor…)• Poor internal business controls (i.e.: lousy customer service, poor accounting, bad record-keeping,theft, fraud, etc…)• Focusing too much on cost-cutting (i.e.: not controlling controllable expenses)66© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPART IILAYING THEFOUNDATION67© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNo matter how it’s looked at, writing accurately, briefly, and with clarity is an essential businessskill. This is because writing, particularly in a business context, fulfils four important roles:1. It conveys information by communicating intentions, objectives, opinions, and ideas as well ason-going developments and plans for the future. Written material - in any format - can also beconveniently filed away and stored as a form of definitive recording.2. It clarifies information by helping to eliminate misunderstood ideas. Writing forces the personwho is writing to think about and clarify the idea/subject that he or she is writing about. Topicstend to be confirmed and strengthened when someone takes the time to write them down.3. It reflects seriousness on the part of the writer. Committing a project to writing shows intent,devotion, and dedication.4. It holds people accountable. Poor communication is often blamed for problems as diverse as: a)credibility issues; b) incompetence; and, c) differences in beliefs. These situations can be avoidedif the use of clear, concise information is understood beforehand. Writing also provides a guidethat can be used to measure and compare thoughts with others as well as future results.Why Write A Business Plan?When one takes into consideration the fact that the number one reason why new businesses fail isa lack of planning, the importance of writing a business plan becomes more apparent. Don’t try toavoid the time and hassle of sitting down and putting together a comprehensive plan. A wellresearched business plan makes it possible to:- define and refine a business concept,- keep a focus on objectives,- spot and rectify weaknesses before they become major problems,- recruit personnel by defining what is needed and what skills employees must have,- create a map that helps guide a business through unfriendly environments,- convince investors that the business idea is sound,- convince money lenders of the entrepreneur’s ability to pay back a loan,- convince potential customers that the business will serve them reliably, and,- obtain necessary permits and licenses.The Essentials of Good PlanningThe main purpose of a business plan is to compare the (potential) sales of a product against itsexpenses. Put another way, a business plan is not a forum for an entrepreneur to brag about howwonderful or creative his or her idea is. What potential customers say about the product and what themarket reveals are far more important. As discussed in Chapter 5, the point of business research is to:(1) determine who is going to buy a product, (2) find out how many are going to buy it, and, (3)discover if the market is strong enough to sustain future sales. A business that plans on selling icecream, for example, needs to know how much it costs to produce, sell, and store ice cream. Thisincludes the cost of raw materials, equipment expenses, the cost of licenses, utility costs, and so on.Chapter 11Writing a Business PlanChance favors the prepared mind.’Louis Pasteur68© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWriting a Business Plan — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFurther analysis will reveal how many scoops of ice cream must be sold per week to cover theseexpenses (see Break-Even Point, Chapter 13). If the numbers show that the amount of moneycollected from projected sales is greater than the costs of production, it’s likely that a profit canbe made.A Sample Business Plan LayoutThe essentials of a good business plan include (1) an executive summary, (2) a clear description ofthe product and the people behind it, (3) research findings, (4) marketing strategies, and, (5) costs,wages, and financial projections. In other words, good business plans do not rely on expensivebindings, novel-length discourses, or fancy graphics; the emphasis is on solid information and reliableexplanations as to how the information was collected. The following outline is designed to help write asolid business plan. A brief description accompanies each section. Note that nine sections are notmandatory when it comes to writing a business plan, however, the criteria in each of the nine sectionsdoes need to be addressed. Ideally, every section of a business plan should be easy-to-read and bearranged to suit the eye of the intended reader.Section 1: A Cover Page and Table of Contents. First impressions are important. Every businessplan needs an eye-catching, professional-looking cover page followed by an easy-to-use tableof contents.Section 2: An Executive Summary. A good summary briefly uses one or two pages to describethe product (or service), its competitive advantages, who the product will serve, the size of themarket, the goals and objectives of the entrepreneur, and a few profitability estimates. Keepeverything short. The objective here is to whet the reader’s appetite not to explain details.Section 3: A Full Description of the Product/Service. This includes how it was conceived, whyit’s needed, its function and design, why it’s different, and comparisons with similar products/services. Focus on competitive advantages and disadvantages and provide a brief overview ofthe intended customer base. Profitability estimates (along with how the estimates wereobtained) should also be included.Section 4: A Description of the Business. Goals and objectives should be mentioned as well asthe intended location of the business (and why). An explanation of the business’s legalstructure and organizational set-up is mandatory. Comparisons with similar businesses arealso useful.Section 5: Market Potential. Here’s where market research enters the picture. This sectionneeds to have a full assessment of the market (itemized demographics, characteristics, andtrends), a complete description of product demand (i.e.: where perspective customers arelocated - and their numbers), the future outlook of the market, and a thorough analysis of thecompetition (who the competitors are, where they are, their strengths and weaknesses, and aforecast of their future intentions). Be certain that the data used is accurate and reliable (inother words, don’t exaggerate). All numbers and forecasts will need explanations clearlyshowing how data was obtained if a loan from a bank or other source is needed.Section 6: Marketing Strategy. This is a plan showing how the business will announce itsarrival, how its product will be advertised and promoted, the costs involved, market entrybarriers (and solutions), the intended price of the product, and distribution plans (and costs).A brief description of selling procedures and how sales (or the sales team) will be organized isequally as important.Section 7: Financial Overview. If outside funding is being sought this will be the section moststudied by investors and money-lenders. Indeed, many experts consider the financial sectionof a business plan to be the most important. Financial forecasts for the first year, second year,third year, and fifth year (with balance sheets) are mandatory, along with a brief descriptionexplaining how the numbers were obtained. Income statements (based on research estimates)69© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWriting a Business Plan — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessas well as outgoing cash-flow projections (itemized costs) need to be clear and concise. Abreakeven analysis is important as is the intended sources of required funds and how thatfunding will be applied. Do not place financial information in paragraph form. Numbersshould be displayed in easy-to-read graphs or charts (see Figures 11-1 to 11-5, pp. 71-72).Section 8: The People Behind the Plan. This section involves a description of the main peoplewho will be implementing the plan including a run-down of each person’s skills, experiences,education, and background. Also worth describing are the number of employees needed, arun-through of wage requirements (including those of the entrepreneur), job descriptions, abrief synopsis of job responsibilities, and the business’s employee training procedures.Section 9: An Exit Strategy. Because too many entrepreneurs don’t know when to call it quits,an exit strategy is an important consideration. For example, if the business proves to besuccessful it may be necessary to hire an experienced manager to handle growth. At whatpoint will this be done? On the other hand, if the business is losing money, a course of actionshould be established in advance as to when and how to end operations. How much moneywill be lost before failure is recognized? Will the business be sold in its entirety – or will it bebroken into pieces and sold? An exit strategy can provide possible answers to these questionslong before the entrepreneur descends deeper into debt.The Most Common Mistakes Made When Writing a Business Plan- Verbosity. If asked to describe themselves, few people begin by talking about their birth, theiradolescence, their teen years, their first love, their pets, and all their experiences and encountersup to the present day. Curiously, however, many people take this route when writing a businessplan. The message? Don’t overdo it. Keep each section of the business plan as short andconcise as possible.- Lack of Scope includes not having sufficient data to complete nine sections of a business plan aswell as ‘the 13 Main Reasons Why Businesses Fail’.- Overconfidence or Lack of Insight. ‘Eager beaver’ entrepreneurs who rely on hope, charm, orenthusiasm rather than legitimate research impress no one. Every section of a business planshould stick to solid research and facts. All it takes is one embellished ‘fact’ or uninformedopinion to reveal itself and the entire business plan will be seen as a complete fabrication.Additional Suggestions for Writing a Solid Business PlanKeep the following suggestions in mind before, during, and after writing a business plan:1. Stay on track (consider the specific reason why your plan is being written)- What is the plan’s intention? What is it supposed to accomplish? Is its purpose to acquirefunding, to gain licensing permission, or is there another focus?- Can the aim be summarized in one sentence and be used as the main point? It should.2. Convey the message of the plan in a way that its recipient(s) will understand- Exactly who will be reading the document?- What are their likes and dislikes? (if this is not known, ask the recipients)- Is the correct tone or attitude being used?- How much does the recipient already know about the topic?- Will he or she understand the terms and language used?70© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWriting a Business Plan — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business3. Structure the plan carefully (organize and clarify)- Does the document proceed in a logical and organized way?- Does every sentence and paragraph justify itself? (i.e.: is it organized around a central theme?)- Have enough graphs, details and/or explanations been included to support the main point?- Is everything that has been written down necessary? (if not, remove it)- Is it clear to the reader what he or she needs to know or do afterwards?4. Take the time to develop, revise, and edit the ‘completed’ document before submitting it.- Is the document’s layout effective? (are its titles, spacing and text well-balanced?)- Is the documents information and style easily accessible?- Has someone proof-read the document? (it should be proof-read by several people)- Do the beginning and ending statements have a resounding impact?Business Plan Advice from the Pros- Don’t try to impress the intended recipient of a business plan (usually a financier) with fancyjargon or overly-technical wording.- When crunching your research numbers, don’t forget to add personal wage requirements intothe overall expenses – even if you plan on living off your savings (or your parents) for a while.Wage requirements include rent (or mortgage payments), car payments, insurance needs, bills,energy costs, pocket money, and food and living expenses.- Keep your business plan short and to the point. Avoid long sentences and long paragraphs.- Don’t be ambiguous. Ambiguity does not reduce opposition, hide insecurity, cut down onquestions or allow you to be all things to all people. It just makes you look bad.- Have all facts and figures reviewed by a professional before showing them to others.- For the financial section of the business plan, develop a worst case scenario, an expectedscenario, and a better-than-expected scenario for the first, third, and fifth year of operations.For example, if you think the business will capture 10% of a particular market, also makeforecasts for 5% and 15% (see page 71, FIGURE 11-2 and 11-3).- Check with a local bank to see if it offers a business plan booklet. Business plans that aretailored around the preferences of a lender improve the chances of obtaining a loan from thatlender.- Use graphs rather than an avalanche of words to explain complicated numerical information.- If help is needed in putting together the financial section of a plan, consider hire an accountant.It may be money well spent.Examples of numerical dataThe following information is based on a fictitious business. The basic idea is to create an energyevaluation and waste-energy elimination service that saves money (e.g.: a service that travels to acustomer’s home, conducts an energy evaluation, and provides detailed solutions intended to lowerenergy costs). The appeal of the service is that its cost is usually paid back within two to four monthsas a result of the energy savings obtained. Note that the information on this page reveals the size andscope of the target market only.71© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWriting a Business Plan — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFigure 11-1 (Household Income and Number of Households of Region)This chart, based on public records, shows the local income levels where the proposed business isenvisioned. The percentage of current households correlating to each income bracket is included. Household Income(in local currency) %. ofhouseholdsNo. ofhouseholds< 10,000 65.7% 179,95210,000 – 14,000 15.5% 42,55514,001 – 18,000 4.7% 12,87318,001 – 25,000 8.6% 23,555> 25,001 5.5% 15,065 Total 100% 274,000Figure 11-2 (Scenarios for estimated size of household market)Following is an estimation of the potential number of customers that can be expected within thehousehold target market. Note that four possible scenarios are displayed (very high, high, medium,and low). Keep in mind that the size of a potential market does not reflect actual sales. The purpose ofthis data is to help prove that a viable household market exists – nothing more, nothing less. Actualsales, which will have to be independently researched and estimated, may only amount to 1% of thepotential market.Total number of regional households % of Target Market274,000 Very High High Medium Low60% 50% 40% 30%Total size of potential market 164,400 137,000 109,600 82,200Figure 11-3 (Scenarios for estimated size of the business market)Following is an estimation of the size of the potential market of targeted businesses (nothouseholds). Note that as in FIGURE 11-2 (above), this chart also uses four possible scenarios (veryhigh, high, medium, and low) to reveal the number of potential customers in the overall market. Actualsales, which will have to be independently researched and estimated, may only amount to 1% or less ofthe potential market.Total number of local businesses 65,000Target Market 75% Very High High Medium Low29,250 24,375 19,500 14,62572© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWriting a Business Plan — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFigure 11-4 (Pricing)Following are the estimated price figures (in local currency) that will be charged for the service.Multiplying the estimated price by the estimated number of services sold per week will lead to anestimated weekly net profit. Obviously, these prices will have to be reconsidered if they do not appealto customers and if they do not meet expenses. Vat refers to Value Added Tax.Price Price including tax (VAT)Local Homeowner 227 250Local Business 337 370Figure 11-5 (Income and Expenditure Statement)Following is an overview of the revenues and costs figures that will be needed. Keep in mindthat a complete business plan will include a more detailed itemized list showing how these numberswere obtained. Using the target market data from the previous page, a business planner canestimate yearly growth at 5%, or 10% or any other expectation based on projected sales numbers,marketing strategy, and aggressiveness.Revenue Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5From service salesFrom merchandise salesCostsSalaries and wagesTravel allowancesTrainingMedicalStaff recruitmentLeaseAdvertising and marketingUtilitiesCommunication costsPaper, printing, postageMaintenanceMotor vehicle expensesAudit fees & outside servicesBank chargesDepreciationTotal CostsOperating IncomeInterest on loansNet Income before TaxNet Income after TaxNet Income for the Year73© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSome businesses require little more than pocket change to get started; others need hundreds ofthousands of dollars or more. Whatever amount is needed, bear in mind that raising money is meantto be a difficult process. The obstacles and problems inherent in obtaining money, particularly from alending institution, are designed to filter out those who are unfit to survive. Put another way, if anentrepreneur fails to raise enough cash to get his or her ideas off the ground then he or she has showna lack of what it takes to run a business. There is nothing new in this. ‘Starting a business is easy,’ saysthe owner and operator of Procontra P/L, a building maintenance company in Sydney, Australia,‘running it and funding it is hard.’ Welcome to the world of commercial enterprise where after 50doors have been slammed in your face the next one must still be approached with courtesy, optimism,and a smile.Sources of FinanceThe trick to finding capital, say some entrepreneurs, is getting it from the right sources and in theright sequence as a business grows and evolves. This means that when searching for funding everyavailable avenue should be explored. Learn from every approach. For example, if a loan officer at alocal bank turns down your request, politely ask why and use what is said to improve the next pitch.Often enough it’s not what a money lender is told, but what the money lender wants to hear that ismost important. Furthermore, when looking for lenders, try to find ones that specialize in the specificindustry or field in which the proposed business is located. Investors are usually more receptive toindustries and businesses they understand.Following, in alphabetical order, are the most common examples of where money can be obtained.Ask around and investigate to determine how each option in your region or country can bemaximized:BanksWinning over a bank is one of the highest hurdles a start-up business faces. Banks are necessary tosmall business operators for two reasons, (1) they’re a safe place to store money, and, (2) they can be asource of finance and other services. Unfortunately, most banks enjoy loaning money to people andbusinesses that don’t need it. This is because every bank wants to ensure that it gets its money back.Note also that:- Banks are by nature cautious. Requests for money must therefore be backed up with firm factsand figures.- Banks seek security in the form of proven cash revenues or collateral. If you don’t have one orthe other, you probably won’t get a loan.- If a bank is uncooperative or uninterested in your needs, move on to another one.- Banks do not exist to help keep businesses afloat.- People run banks. If you get to know these people your chances of success may increase.- Banks hate surprises. Therefore, if you manage to secure a loan and can’t make a payment ontime, you should tell your bank in advance.- Banks make mistakes. A study in the UK discovered that up to 20% of the statements banksChapter 12Finding FinanceFinance is the art of passing currency fromhand to hand until it finally disappears.’Robert W. Sarnof74© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding Finance —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesssend out are inaccurate. It’s therefore prudent to regularly check bank statements.- Always approach a bank or banker having done a bit of homework. It shows that you’re on topof things, which demonstrates integrity and professionalism.- Most banks are often open to negotiation when it comes to interest rates. Don’t be afraid tohaggle (Becket, 2003).Corporate VenturingSome companies loan money to entrepreneurs in the hopes of establishing a working relationshipwith them. This is called corporate venturing. Needless to say, the skill or product of the entrepreneurmust be of benefit to the company being asked and be backed by a solid business plan. The companyto which the idea is being pitched may also seek some type of equity share (ownership) agreement.Just make sure the idea or product being pushed is first protected by a patent or copyright (seeChapter 16).CrowdfundingThe practice of obtaining funds by publically asking for small donations has been practiced forcenturies. The cost of the Statue of Liberty, for example, was crowd-funded by a newspaper campaign.Paying for upcoming military campaigns by selling war bonds and writers collecting cash from futurebuyers to fund an as-yet-to-be-printed book provide two additional examples. Nowadays, more thantwo-dozen crowd-funding sites exist online. These include, gofundme, kickstarter, indiegogo, crowdrise,patreon, crowdfunder, and so on. Crowd-funding schemes usually involve either pre-selling a product(which is similar to a ‘production contract’ arrangement) or the selling of some sort of equity in thebusiness that is producing the product. Either way, it can be extremely difficult to generate theattention of individuals and groups without an established network and/or skillful mediainvolvement. An extraordinary public-relations or marketing campaign (and/or incredibly goodtiming) seem to be essential to crowdfunding success. Don’t be seduced by stories that makecrowdfunding look easy. Without first establishing a vibrant business network, crowdfunding can beas fickle and distant as winning the lottery.Equipment LoansExpensive equipment (i.e.: machinery, display cases, tools, etc…) can sometimes be purchased withan extended, low-interest loan from the company that produces or sells the equipment. In return, theentrepreneur may be asked to sell or advertise the company’s products in his or her business (usuallyvia professional signs and displays). Talk with suppliers and manufacturers for more information.Family and FriendsEntrepreneurs that can prove (or have shown) that they’re trustworthy and reliable - and have puttogether a viable business plan - may be able to find family members or friends who are willing tocough up the cash needed to start a business. Note, however, that these folks should not be rewardedwith administrative titles in return for their help (which may create future problems). It’s also usuallynot a good idea to ask friends and family to invest their life savings in a business (they may not get itback). Since asking friends and family for money is the most personal of routes to take this avenuemust be planned with care and forethought.Government HelpLocal, state, and federal governments sometimes offer financial resources for small businesses ifand when certain requirements are met. Examples include businesses that employ handicappedpeople (or minorities), businesses located in areas in need of economic assistance, businesses designedto help the environment, or businesses designed to reduce local problems. Contact a local economicdevelopment office for details. In the USA, a good source for such help is the book Free Help from UncleSam to Start Your Own Business, by William Alarid and Gustav Berle.75© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding Finance —The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessGrantsGrants provide money that does not have to be paid back. Universities, professional organizations,governments, and trade associations are typical grant sources (including the European Union - if thebusiness is in Europe). The unemployed, pensioners, young entrepreneurs, artists, and other out-ofthe-mainstream groups are usually the most eligible to receive a grant if they qualify – as arecompetent people who trying to set up a business in an underdeveloped area. For the most partgrants do not involve large sums of money – only a few hundred or a few thousand dollars at most –but for a fledgling business a small amount of cash can go a long way toward reducing expenses. Apartfrom seed funding, grants can also be obtained for employee training, marketing costs, and insurance.Don’t be ashamed to ask for help in the form of a grant. Just be prepared to fill out lots of formsbefore and after any money is received.Issuing SharesThe issuing of shares is a finance option that is only available to businesses that are incorporated.The advantage of issuing shares is that the people that buy them don’t have to be paid back. Thedisadvantage is that the people who buy shares are part owners of the business and as such they canhold the entrepreneur accountable for whatever he or she does (or doesn’t do). Shares can be used in avariety of ways. For example, a cocktail bar in London, England recently issued shares to itsemployees as part of its payment package. In return, the operator of the bar says he has one of themost motivated workforces in the UK. For more information about issuing shares see Chapter 15.Small Business Administration LoansLoans available from the Small Business Administration (SBA) in the USA include:1. Direct SBA loans (which have a low interest rate). The name comes from the fact that this type ofloan is issued directly from the government. Unfortunately, because Direct SBA loans areintended for minorities and veterans they may be difficult to acquire if the person requestingthem does not qualify.2. Guaranteed loans are sometimes available to individuals who have been turned down by a bank.The scheme works by having the government guarantee a loan (via a participating bank) onbehalf of the entrepreneur. More leeway is therefore usually given in paying the loan back.For more information on small business administration loans, including tips on raising capital,finding grant resources, equity financing, and more, visit www.sba.gov or contact a local bank ornearby Small Business Development Center.Soft LoansLoans are declared ‘soft’ when they do not require security or collateral, their payback schedule islong, and their due dates are extendable. That being said, every penny that is borrowed must be paidback, with interest, just like a regular loan. Small Business Development Centers, local governments,business-oriented banks, corporations, business trusts, and other business-friendly associations arethe best places to look for soft loans.Trade CreditSome suppliers do not require payment for the merchandise they sell for up to 30 days or longer– so that the purchaser has time to sell the merchandise before paying for it. If a small business has asolid customer base and it has little doubt that it can shift merchandise easily, this can be a creativeway to lower inventory costs and begin trading with less money than was originally envisioned.Venture CapitalistsA venture capitalist is a person or group that finances businesses. In return, he or she (as partowner) expects to share in the success of the business in which his or her investment has been made76© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFinding Finance — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesswhile expecting yearly growth rates of up to 40% or higher. Because most venture capitalists aresuccessful business people in their own right, they’re often adept at determining if a commercial ideais a good one. Note that many venture capitalists are not really interested in providing capital forsmall businesses. Instead, they look for high-flying enterprise ideas that have big profit expectationsand will pay back their investment very quickly. Additionally, since most venture capitalists are only init for the money (who isn’t?) they may sell their shares to unknown buyers in a few years time.Mixing Up the OptionsIf the sources mentioned above aren’t enough on their own, consider mixing them up. Maybe alocal bank won’t lend $100,000 to start a business, but it may consider $25,000. Additional funds canthen be obtained from family and friends, the selling off of personal assets, and so on. Still more cashcan come from grants or through trade credits or equipment loans. Don’t be afraid to be creative.Advice from the Pros- When in need of finance, shop around, be persistent, and never be afraid to ask for advice.- Open up every available line of credit before going into business – even if it means taking onmore credit cards. Few institutions will loan money to a cash-hungry business after it has beenset up.- Ensure that all equipment and machinery is bought at the best price and under the bestconditions. Used equipment may be seem like a less expensive alternative to new equipment,but make certain what you buy has lots of life left in it. Entrepreneurs that buy cheap often buytwice. Remanufactured equipment, which comes with a guaranty, is a much safer bet. (Authornote: if you’re in need of office furniture, try not to buy brand new items. The cost of newbusiness furniture is usually grossly over-inflated; remanufactured is a far better option, and noone will notice the difference).- Get to know your banker before you need money from him or her (i.e.: while you’re still solvent).Being desperately in need of cash is a bad time to introduce yourself to a money lender.- Do your homework before seeking cash. You may need more than you thought. Manyentrepreneurs claim that every time they turn around there seems to be another payment thathas to be made (for licenses, fees, duties, permits, etc…). Prepare for this fact.- Don’t let your business die a death from a thousand cuts. Little expenses add up and they canbreak a business. Again, factor everything in.- After you’ve deduced how much finance your business needs to get up and running, double thefigure. (Some entrepreneurs suggest tripling it!)- The world is littered with failed businesses whose owners were too proud or stubborn to ask formoney when it was needed. Borrowing money is not a sign of weakness, but rather a normal,everyday business occurrence. Know that taking on debt is often a necessity if you’re thinking ofexpanding.- Consider selling equity (shares) in your business as a means of reducing debt. Although thismeans that the people with equity shares will own a part of your business, you don’t have to paythem back (which can significantly reduce expenses).- Lending institutions are more receptive to entrepreneurs that hold production contracts (i.e.:orders for a product). Getting potential customers to order a product before your business getsstarted may be difficult to do, but it can be done. Use such orders to impress a lender.77© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThere’s no getting around it. Mathematics is the international language of business and a basicbusiness tool. Using numbers to read commercial indicators greatly increases the chance of success inthe marketplace. Failure to do so only invites trouble. No matter how it’s looked at, entrepreneurshave to be able to work with numbers.The Importance of NumbersPaying attention to the details of how money enters and exits a business helps to keep theenterprise solvent in five important ways:- it measures success,- it helps point out any weaknesses,- it can indicate areas that need improvement,- it can help to anticipate a crisis, and,- it can show that profits during good months are enough to cover unprofitable slow months.How does accurate financial information do all this? A common theme that runs through mostbusinesses in distress is a lack of financial control and discipline. For example, consider theentrepreneur who ran a business in the USA that offered basic carpentry and repair services tohomeowners. He thought he was doing well until a professional looked at his accounts and discoveredthat he was making only $4,000 per year (Norman, 1999). The lesson here is that too many smallbusiness owners shy away from accurate book-keeping (maintaining financial records), which makesthem susceptible to:- poor inventory control,- theft,- the need for the collection of owed money (which can be a huge problem),- a lack of planning,- poor decision making, and,- inaccurate record keeping (which can result in audits and penalties).Keeping accounts is not difficult, but it is time-consuming and tedious. Like most endeavors,however, once the gist of bookkeeping has been learned most people wonder what on earth they wereafraid of. Books, software programs, and courses on how to read and prepare financial statements areavailable almost everywhere including the Internet, community education facilities, colleges,universities, and Small Business Development Centers. As one entrepreneur from the Netherlandsstated, ‘Everyone who wants to start a business should become familiar with relevant bookkeepingand financial terms. It just makes life easier. To do otherwise sets the stage for trouble.’ This is quite apopular opinion amongst business owners. One third of the Australian business owners questionedfor this book, for example, said that staying on top of accounts and tax obligations is their number onepiece of advice for running a successful business.Chapter 13A Brief Look at Bookkeeping,Numbers, Taxes, and FormulasIf a man’s wit is wandering,let him study mathematics.’Francis Bacon78© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Brief Look at Bookkeeping, Numbers, Taxes and Formulas — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAlthough this book is not meant to be an introduction to accounting and book-keeping, following,in alphabetical order, is a brief overview of some of the financial terms a business owner needs to befamiliar with:AuditsAn audit is the checking of a company’s financial records by an outside source (usually aprofessional accounting firm or a government agency). Audits conducted on small businesses areusually performed - at random - by government agencies (although depending on the area where abusiness is located they could be carried out on a regular basis). When the authorities suspect that abusiness is being dishonest in reporting its revenues, tax regulators will swoop down and conduct amore extensive search. This means that every transaction for up to seven years may be questioned. Toavoid heavy fines (and/or jail time), never fake or embellish business accounts or try and boostpersonal income by not reporting revenues.Balance SheetsA balance sheet (see Figure 13-1) shows how well (or poorly) a business is doing by revealing assets(what the business owns including cash, inventory, equipment…) and liabilities (money the businessowes such as: bills, loans, etc) on a single piece of paper in two columns. Not surprisingly, balancesheets are called ‘balance sheets’ because the storage and display of the numerical information theyreveal (usually in two columns) should balance out.Figure 13-1 Example of a Balance SheetBalance SheetAssets Liabilities and CapitalCurrent Assets Current LiabilitiesCash $12,300 Accounts payable $8,944Accounts receivable $22,400 Wages payable 11,500Inventory $32,090 Total Current Liabilities $20,450Prepaid Insurance $3,000 Long-Term LiabilitiesTotal Current Assets $69,790 Bank Loan Payable 17,500Fixed Assets Total Long-Term Liabilities $17,500Equipment 100,200 Total Liabilities $37,925Less Accumulated Depreciation (78,321) CapitalAssets 21,879 From parents $53,700$91,669 Total Liabilities/Capital $91,669Basic BookkeepingMost small businesses record financial information in:- a cash book (to record receipts and payments),- a petty cash book (to keep track of everyday minor expenses such as paper, pens, stamps,envelopes, paperclips, taxi fares, coffee, etc…),- a customer account book for credit sales (to record invoices),- a purchases book (for purchases not covered by petty cash), and,- a wage book (if the business employs several people)Don’t be confused by the word ‘book’. The information contained in these ‘books’ can also bestored electronically. In fact, it’s easier to keep track of accounts on a computer. Spreadsheet79© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Brief Look at Bookkeeping, Numbers, Taxes and Formulas — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessprograms are available that debit and credit accounts automatically thereby avoiding hand-made errorsor illegible entries. Either way, all information pertaining to purchases and sales (perhaps kept on twoseparate copies) should be collected and stored in a safe place. Information collected and stored forlater use includes:- receipts and invoices,- check-book stubs (and cancelled checks),- bank statements, and,- tax information (as required by local and federal law).Break-Even PointA business is said to ‘break even’ when the amount of money collected from the sales of itsproducts or services equals the amount of money spent on costs. Calculating the point at which thishappens is a good way to determine how many products must be manufactured (and sold) or howmany customers need to be serviced before a profit is made. To find a business’s break-even point,determine the fixed costs of the business, its variable costs, and the sales price of the product beingsold (per unit).- Fixed costs are expenses that remain constant (or nearly so) no matter how much is produced.Examples of fixed costs include rent, monthly salaries, interest, and capital depreciation.- Variable costs increase when production increases. Variable costs include: materials, labor (if paidon an hourly or per unit basis), utilities (electricity, gas, and water), transportation, salescommissions and so on.Once this information has been gathered, the break-even point is calculated as follows:For example, say a business manufactures flowerpots that sell for $5 a piece. If $2 in variable costsare required to make each flowerpot and total fixed costs amount to $750, then 250 flowerpots(amounting to $1,250 in sales) will have to be sold before a profit is made.Cash Register SalesMost cash registers can be programmed to separate merchandise into categories and subcategories.Every time a purchase is made, the cash register then records what was bought and when it wasbought. This provides an accurate record as to how well different lines of merchandise are selling aswell as when they are being purchased. Keeping track of this information allows an entrepreneur to(1) eliminate items that aren’t selling, (2) stock up on items that do sell, and, (3) determine theprofitability of merchandise.Cost of Goods SoldThe ‘cost of goods sold’ (also known as ‘cost of sales’) shows how expensive it is to produce aproduct (for manufacturers) or sell merchandise (for retailers) by determining if too much money isbeing invested in inventory. The formula is as follows:Total fixed expensesBreak-even point = (in number of units)Selling price per unit - Variable costs per unit80© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Brief Look at Bookkeeping, Number, Taxes, and Formulas — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessall inventory purchase costs (amount x price paid)= Cost of Goods Soldcosts (amount X price) – what is left of the inventorySubtracting the cost of goods sold from the amount the business paid for them shows gross profit.InventoryThe total number of products a business has for sale (both on the sales floor and in its stockroom), or the number of raw materials on hand for manufacturing purposes, is called inventory.Imagine having to shut down a production line because a raw material has run out - or - operating apub with no beer to sell during a football match. Carefully scheduling and storing materials andmerchandise helps prevent such catastrophes from occurring. That being said, no business wants towaste money by storing items that are not needed straight away. Successful inventory managementwill produce a maximum amount of profit (by never running out of what is needed) with the leastamount of investment (i.e.: not tying up the business’s cash reserves by purchasing too much stock).With a little practice, most people can become good at this – particularly when accurate records arekept and reliable suppliers and wholesalers have been found.Inventories should always be checked and counted on a regular basis. Unaccounted for losses arecalled shrinkage (e.g.: items that have disappeared due to theft, spoilage, accidents, poor recordkeeping, or damage). Through careful observation and control, preventative steps must be taken toavoid shrinkage to prevent it from becoming a reoccurring problem (see the last entry in the Advicefrom the Pros section, Chapter 30, page 166).Ledger BooksOnce a business starts expanding it may need a set of ledgers. A ledger is a detailed account book.- Sales ledgers keep track of individual customer accounts (thereby showing who the most valuedcustomers are).- A purchases ledger stores information about suppliers (which can determine who a businesspurchases from most and therefore who - amongst its suppliers - is most likely to give credit ordiscounts).- A general ledger includes all sales and purchases data as well as income and expenditure totals.Ledgers operate under a double-entry system. This means that every transaction is recorded twice:once as a debit and once as a credit, depending on who is receiving money and who is spending it. Forexample, a sale where payment has not yet been received is recorded in a customer account ledger as adebit - and a credit in the business’s general ledger. It would take a full-length discourse to explain theintricacies of ledger accounting (which, again, is not the purpose of this book) so if keeping a set ofledgers is necessary or desired seek additional help from a specialized source for more information.Monthly Net ProfitTo determine how much money a business is pulling in per month, add up all total sales for onemonth and subtract labor expenses, material and equipment costs, taxes, and expenditures (includinginventory not yet sold). What’s left is the monthly net profit.81© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Brief Look at Bookkeeping, Number, Taxes, and Formulas — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessProfitsA profit is the amount of money a business makes after all expenses have been paid. Generallyspeaking, there are three types of business profits:- Gross Profit – is the total of all sales before expenses are subtracted.- Operating Profit – shows how much money has been made after deducting expenses that aredirectly related to producing a product (i.e.: everything except interest, depreciation, and taxes).- Net Profit – is the total amount of money a business has made after all expenses have beendeducted.TaxesAlmost every business, no matter how big or small, must register itself with local or nationalauthorities in order to collect sales taxes (also known as VAT or Value Added Tax). In return, thebusiness will be issued a tax identification number and the necessary forms for recording taxinformation. Completed sales tax forms usually have to be sent to an official collection point at leastonce a month.In addition to collecting sales tax or VAT, business owners are also responsible for paying local,state, and federal taxes - including property taxes. Much information is available about how to preparetaxes and most of it is given away free at government offices. Don’t put it off. As with any businessmonetary transaction, check and recheck all figures before submitting a tax statement. Whether abusiness decides to handle its own tax matters or hire an account or tax adviser, if an error is made thebusiness owner will be held accountable.Advice from the Pros- Every business, no matter how small, must have its own, separate bank account. Never conductbusiness using a personal account.- Keep track of inventory very closely and eliminate money-losers (items that don’t sell well).- Don’t try to hide revenues from tax authorities. If internal revenue agents believe - or evensuspect - something dishonest is going on, they will swarm over your business for many years tocome.- The legal structure a business chooses has a profound effect on tax and insurance rates. Makesure you choose the right legal structure for your business (see Chapter 15).- If you have no experience when it comes to accounting, hire a professional to look after yourbooks. By asking questions and spending time with this person you may be able to graduallyperform your own bookkeeping.- Personally review and sign all business checks and payments. NEVER give anyone else theauthority to do this for you.82© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgOnce a business idea has been fully researched and deemed viable – and a business plan has beenwritten - it’s time to start taking action. Granted, it can be quite daunting turning an idea into ‘bricksand mortar’, nevertheless, it is important to take that first step and gain momentum (‘Just do it!’ ishow one Canadian entrepreneur put it). The first step is to create a list of things to do with the aim ofcompleting at least one task every day. Tasks can include testing the name of the business, puttingtogether a logo, creating a workspace, setting up a website, ordering business cards and stationary, andso on. Ironically, these tasks are usually the most enjoyable because they: (1) involve creativity, (2)result in physical progress, and, (3) can be looked at, admired, and shared with others.Naming the Business (or Product)Many years ago, my uncle (Robert F. Steidel) was chairing a meeting at the University of California,Berkeley that had been convened to figure out why a planned course on water desalinization was notattracting the attention of students. ‘Maybe we should make the title sound more interesting,’someone at the table suggested. My uncle agreed and called for the input of everyone present.Unfortunately, the attendees immediately began spouting out complex course titles, each lengthierand more pretentious than the last. Eventually, my uncle could bear it no longer. ‘What’s the purposeof this course?’ he interrupted. ‘Basically, it teaches people how to turn salt water into fresh water,’someone replied. ‘Well then,’ my uncle continued, ‘why don’t we just call it that?’ Everyone agreed.The following semester, ‘How to Turn Salt Water into Fresh Water’ became one of the most popularcourses on campus.The moral of this story is that choosing the right name to represent a business (or product) is vital.Making changes at a later time can be time-consuming, expensive, and result in lost income. Withthis in mind, the following guidelines are recommended by experienced business owners:1. Keep the full name short and simple and ensure that each of the words which make up the fullname are equally as short and simple (one, two, or three syllables at most).2. Describe what the business does in the name. Alliterations such as Zips or Clicks or even the firstor last name of the entrepreneur, may roll easily off the tongue, but provide no insight as towhat the business does. Clicks Home Computer Repairs is more specific.3. Don’t be too clever. Names that employ wordplay, gimmicks, or intentional misspellings moreoften than not denote that you are an amateur.4. Make sure the name not only sounds right, but also looks right on a logo or sign.5. Check to ensure that the name is not currently under copyright or trademark or is being used byanother company. This can usually be done when registering the business.6. Get the opinions of others. Throw out a few ideas to other people and judge their reaction. (ForChapter 14Naming Your Business (or Product)and Other Tasks BeforeGetting StartedI have learned that it’s remarkably easy to do thingsand much more frightening to contemplate them.Ted Simon83© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNaming Your Business (or Product) and Getting Started — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessexample, the title of this book was changed at least five times before students and colleagues -and a few editors - stopped scrunching up their faces at it)7. Avoid names that promote incompatible trades (i.e.: Frank’s Income Tax Services, Lawn MowerRepairs, and Bee Keeping). Keep the name to a single purpose.Choosing a LogoSymbols are powerful advertising tools that reflect the character and competence of a business. Ifchosen wisely, a good symbol will radiate a positive image on signs, promotional materials, stationary,and packaging. Suggestions for producing a powerful logo include:- Employ a graphic artist if one can be afforded. This doesn’t mean hiring a multi-thousand dollarprofessional. Quite a few teenagers, college students, family members, or friends with computerskills have the talent to design a professional-looking logo if what is needed (and why) is fullyexplained to them.- Choose a design that is both readable and applicable (both in big print and small print) onT-shirts, coffee mugs, pens, brochures, flyers, and other promotional materials.- Make sure the design, lettering, and artwork reflect what the business does.- Keep the colors simple and basic (more than four colors can result in high printing costs).- Ensure that the color scheme reflects the character of the business. For example, earth tonesand neutral colors denote environmentally friendly intentions. Fluorescent colors do not.- Investigate the final design to ensure it is truly original and doesn’t impede on any existingcopyrights or trademarks. If the design is okay to use, copyright it and/or obtain a trademark asquickly as possible (see Chapter 16).- Make certain that the design will not cost a fortune to reproduce.Obtaining a Business Mailing Address and Phone NumberMany business operators insist on having a separate mailing address for their company in order toprevent their business and their private lives from mixing. For people that work from home thismeans looking into obtaining a post office box. Post office boxes are inexpensive and ensure that theentrepreneur gets out on a daily basis. Post office box numbers can also lend credibility to a business.For more information about post office box rates, contact a local post office or mail delivery centre fordetails. Additional advice from experienced entrepreneurs includes:- If working from home, establish a separate business phone line.- Establish a dedicated business e-mail address that is separate from personal e-mail.- Keep business calls and e-mail replies short and to the point.- Try not to respond to, or make, personal messages during established work hours.Opening a Separate Bank AccountOne of the golden rules of operating a successful business is to establish a dedicated, independent,business bank account. Keeping business finances apart from personal finances is not only necessaryfor tax reasons it also maintains a spirit of professionalism, which helps to keep the business focusedon its purpose. To open up a business bank account it may be necessary to first register the businesswith local or state authorities. This is well worth the effort.Setting Up a WebsiteA website does not have to be fancy or expensive. Although do-it-yourself website creationsoftware programs are available, it is possible to find a designer who will not charge a fortune for his orher services (university students are a good bet). Keep the site basic and it shouldn’t be expensive. Asimple website can always be upgraded later. Following are a few website suggestions:84© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNaming Your Business (or Product) and Getting Started — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Be concise and brief with all wording on a website.- Remain consistent with the business’s theme and purpose.- Select a basic, appropriate color scheme (two or three colors) conducive to ease-of-use. Avoidblack lettering on navy blue backgrounds or white lettering on yellow backgrounds.- Provide an easy to use navigation system that allows users to easily find whatever it is they arelooking for. If the website contains several pages, think about displaying a simple site map andsearch features.- Don’t employ too many special effects. They may distract from the central message.- Avoid overloading the site with animations, pop-up boxes, auto-play music, busy backgrounds,unnecessary jokes and riddles, fun pages, and date and time stamps. Keep to the true purposeof the site.- If possible, set up external links between different websites. The more links a website has theeasier it can be found via a search engine.- If money is tight, consider contacting an ‘affiliate reseller program’. Quite a few companies orwebsite providers offer free personalized websites to entrepreneurs if they agree to advertise andsell certain products on it. In addition, every time someone visits the site and makes a purchase,the entrepreneur is paid a commission. Presumably, another company’s products and logo maydistract from the website’s theme, however, if the products are compatible then establishingconnections with another company may entice more visitors to the site.- Clearly indicate the contact address and numbers of the business and place a ‘return tohomepage’ icon at the top and bottom of every web page.- To keep customers coming back to a website give them a reason to do so by adding and updatingtips, messages, special offers and/or events.- Seek and listen to the opinions of others before putting a website on-line. Business websites arefor the use and enjoyment of customers, not the business owner.- Make certain the website address is clearly labeled on all advertising, business cards, stationary,and so on.Ordering Business Cards and StationaryBusiness materials (stationary, envelopes, business cards, brochures, etc…) that carry the name andlogo of the business provide instant credibility. Even in the age of electronics, it is necessary to carryaround business cards and promotional materials. Entrepreneurs that are not prepared to hand out abusiness card or a brochure while out and about may lose an unexpected opportunity forever.Establishing a Separate Workspace and Work TimeMost people that work from home strongly advise that a separate area be designated for workpurposes. This is done for psychological reasons as well as the need for a quiet area conducive toworking without interruption. As mentioned in Chapter 7, zoning requirements in many residentialareas do not allow for living space to be converted for office or business use. Therefore, check withlocal authorities before making any conversions.A home work area should be a sacred spot that can be left behind without it being invaded by aspouse or partner looking for scrap paper, kids searching for treasures, or the dog looking for a place tonap. It should also be easy to walk away from at the end of the day. The temptation to do just a littlebit more work before eating or going to bed is a real life-drainer (trust me on this). If work duties arenot organized and kept apart from domestic responsibilities an entrepreneur can feel like he or she isdrowning in work. To avoid this sensation establish a schedule that conforms to the hours when workis best performed. Plan each week in advance. Factor-in time for getting out, visiting clients, going tothe gym, eating, doing research, reading, spending time with others, or just switching off. Many85© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNaming Your Business (or Product) and Getting Started — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessprofessionals find that work responsibilities are best accomplished in manageable allotments of time(e-mail answered by 10am, letters written before 2pm, proposals to clients made by 4pm, etc…).Again, don’t forget to schedule and adhere to time for personal needs (eating, relaxing, winding down,etc). Stick to a set schedule for at least a month so it becomes established.InsuranceDon’t think that insurance is unnecessary or unaffordable. The alternative (i.e.: going without) may befar more expensive. If money is tight, consider meeting insurance obligations by joining professionalorganizations or local small business associations that offer reasonable group rates to small businesses.Don’t assume that a homeowner’s policy will cover a business run from your home. Most insurancecompanies insist that any form of business activity requires separate and specific coverage. Even a practiceas benign as accepting a business delivery at home if your actual business is located elsewhere can nullify ahome policy. When searching for business insurance, shop around for the best rates and service (and keepin mind that some insurance is tax deductible); otherwise, more insurance may be obtained than is needed.Examples of different types of available insurance coverage include:- Business premises: which covers damage, loss, and theft.- Disability or critical illness insurance: designed to cover personal income for several weeks after theentrepreneur has been rendered disabled.- General liability: covers injuries to clients while on the premises and/or employees while on the job.- Life insurance: protects your family.- Partnership and/or key-person insurance: protects a surviving business partner by allowing him or her topurchase the shares of the deceased partner while offsetting tax liabilities. ‘Key person’ insurancecovers the loss of an important employee from death, accident, or illness.- Product or service liability: protects a business from lawsuits instigated by customers for products orservices that don’t meet expectations.- Vehicle insurance: covers the business’s vehicle(s). Regular car insurance will not cover a smallbusiness’s vehicle insurance needs. A car or van used for business purposes must be covered by aseparate policy.Advice from the Pros- Whether you work from home or rent separate premises, make sure that commercial leases or cityordinance laws allow a sign to be posted that declares the location and operating hours of yourbusiness. If you post a sign without first checking to make sure it’s legal to do so, you may not only beforced to remove the sign; a hefty fine may have to be paid as well.- Network! Network! Network! Don’t let working from home hinder the necessity of networking. Getto know people in your industry and socialize with them whenever possible by making andscheduling the time to do so. Join a local chamber of commerce or a professional businessorganization.- Particularly if you work alone, set and stick to deadlines even when you don’t need them. Otherwise,procrastination may take over.- Request feedback from customers on a regular basis. Feedback helps identify a business’s weaknesses,helps keeps the entrepreneur motivated, and improves business skills and products.- Work is often a direct reflection of your habits and appearance. When working from home, get up ata set time every morning, shower, and dress yourself in a professional manner. Don’t put off personalhygiene and don’t walk around half the day in your pajamas – your work will reflect it.- Don’t forget to appropriately insure yourself and your business. Most home insurance policies do notcover home businesses.86© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgNo matter where you are or what type of business you wish to establish, most countries have fivetypes of business structures from which to choose. This means that before an entrepreneur canregister his or her business he or she will first have to decide what type of legal structure is wanted(ideally, form should follow function).Please note that the information in this chapter does not constitute legal advice. Rather, theexplanations below present a broad overview of business structures and their relevance. Contact localcounty, regional, or city authorities (the same folks who distribute business tax collection information)for specific details, licensing requirements, and forms. Likewise, phone a local town hall orgovernment office for advice as to where to start. In many instances, it’s prudent to seek the advice ofan attorney or accountant to fully understand the pros and cons of legal structure options beforemaking a final decision. Also note that as a business grows or its needs change its legal structure canbe changed as well (which involves additional paperwork and costs).Legal Structure 1: The Sole Proprietorship (also known as Sole Trader).Is it possible to start a business without having to fill out any forms or pay any registration fees? Insome cases, yes. For example, in the United States (and many other countries) there is no need to fileany federal paperwork to become a sole proprietor (some countries require registration only if revenuescollected from the business exceed certain levels). It may be necessary, however, to register the nameof the business with local or state government offices (again, check with regional authorities).Registering a business usually entails filling out a few forms (including tax forms) and paying a fee.Bear in mind that a sole proprietorship does not necessarily mean that one person works in thebusiness. It means that one person owns the business. Generally speaking, sole proprietorships arenot difficult to setup and reporting taxes is easy. For example, in the USA, a profit and loss statement(called a ‘Schedule C’) attached to a standard 1040 IRS form is all that’s required.Advantages of a Sole Proprietorship- No interference from partners or shareholders.- Simpler tax structure.- Minimal legal paperwork.Disadvantages of a Sole Proprietorship- Loans can only be obtained based on the owner’s reputation and personal guarantee.- Creditors and investors can go after the owner’s personal property (i.e.: all the owner’s personalassets can be liquidated or seized to cover debts).- There are few tax benefits (many expenses can’t be written off).- Business and personal finances can be mixed together, which can cause trouble.- The business can be difficult to sell because the brains and experience behind it (the owner) can’tbe sold.Chapter 15Making Your Business LegalCheshire Puss,’ Alice began… ‘would you pleasetell me which way I ought to go from here?’‘That depends on where you want to get to,’said the cat.’Lewis Carroll87© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgLegal Structure 2: PartnershipsA partnership consists of two or more people joining together to form an enterprise. If anentrepreneur is a loner by nature or simply wants to run his or her business single-handedly, apartnership may not be suitable. However, if the entrepreneur enjoys working with others, or needsthe input or experience of someone else, or requires the added borrowing power, finances, or moralsupport of a partner (or partners) this structure may be ideal. Taking in a partner(s) is a decision thatshould not be made lightly. No matter how well two people get along, running a business together is adifferent ballgame. Effective partnerships require the full defining of the business beforehand and aclear explanation (in writing) of each person’s role in it. In some regions different types ofpartnerships exist ranging from ‘senior partnerships’ (where some partners have more rights thanothers) to ‘cooperatives’. There are other issues to consider as well. For example, if the spouse of onepartner is involved in the business, the other partner may have to constantly defend his or herdecisions to that spouse rather than the partner, which can lead to conflicts. To avoid the numerousproblems that can arise from a partnership the following issues should be covered in the business’swritten articles:1. The date the partnership is formed.2. The names and living addresses of each partner.3. A full description of the business’s purpose.4. The amount and type of investment made by each partner.5. The responsibilities and roles of each partner (as well as the inclusion or exclusion of familymembers).6. Profit and loss arrangements for working partners (e.g.: those who help run the business) andnon-working partners (e.g.: those who invest in the business, but are not involved in day-to-dayoperations).7. A plan that states how assets will be distributed if the business is dissolved.8. A provision that explains what will happen if a partner decides to leave, is forced out, or dies.(This includes buy-sell agreements, insurance settlements, and wills.)Advantages of a Partnership- Simple legal forms (to form a partnership in the USA, a Federal Employee Identification numberis required from the IRS [form SS-4] and a Schedule K1 is sent to each partner).- Simple tax structure (in the USA, a 1065 form must be submitted with the standard 1040).- A limited financial risk for each partner exists if, through a Limited Partnership Agreement, theamount each partner can legally lose is stated as the amount he or she invested in the business.Disadvantages of a Partnership- Each partner is responsible for the acts of the other. In other words, if one partner skips town,the remaining partner can be held liable for any damages or debts.- Without a Limited Liability Agreement, all personal assets owned by the partners can beliquidated or seized to cover any debts.- Friction can and does develop between partners.Legal Structure 3: Limited Liability CompaniesLLC’s can be set-up by an individual or partners. In legal terms, the owners of an LLC are referredto as ‘members’ (a member can be a person, a partnership, or a corporation). The main benefit of anLLC is that, somewhat like a corporation, owner(s) of the company are protected from personalliability in regards to business debts and claims.Making Your Business Legal — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business88© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgMaking Your Business Legal — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvantages of a Limited Liability Company- LLC’s allow for the selling of stock, which can raise capital.- LLC members are personally protected from lawsuits that seek company assets.- The tax structure is simple: owners can usually report income and losses on their own tax forms.- Members of an LLC determine how to divide and distribute profits (unlike a corporation, whichhas this procedure governed through by-laws).Disadvantages of a Limited Liability Company- An investor can lose his or her entire investment because creditors can’t go after the personalassets of the owners.- ‘Article of Organization’ forms must be filled out and filed (a document similar to the Articles ofPartnership issues mentioned above should also be completed).- There is a lot of paperwork involved in the selling of stock.- Compared to corporations, LLC’s can not write-off as many benefits.Legal Structure 4: IncorporationBy definition, a corporation is a legal entity. This means it can own property, sell property, sue, andbe sued. Generally speaking, most business owners incorporate their businesses due to theadvantages of legal liability. Put another way, if the corporation fails, creditors can’t go after theowner(s); they can only go after the assets of the company.Setting up as a corporation is the most complicated (and expensive) form of business structure.This is because expenses are entailed in legally explaining the nature of the business, setting it up, andregistering it. For example, filing fees may only be a few hundred dollars, but preparing the requireddocuments can cost many times that amount. Additionally, annual reports, by-laws (which state howthe corporation will be governed), and yearly state and federal tax forms must also be completed.Regardless of the type of corporation that’s desired (see ‘S Corporation’ below), every corporate chartershould include the following:1. The name of the corporation, its location, and the date of incorporation.2. A formal statement of corporate formation.3. The names and addresses of all partners and directors.4. A full explanation of the business and its activities.5. Classifications as to the type of the corporation’s stock as well as the number of shares forsale and the value of each share.6. The voting privileges of stockholders.7. A listing of the names and addresses of all capital stock subscribers.8. A statement of limited liability of the stockholders.Advantages of Incorporation- Stock can be sold to raise capital or be offered to employees as financial compensation.- If the corporation is extremely profitable, it can save money by re-investing the profits in thecompany rather than paying them out.- Having the letters ‘Inc.’ after the name of a company shows clout.- Some companies will only do business with corporations due to liability issues.- There is no personal liability risk if someone sues the business.- Profits can be used for health benefits.Disadvantages of Incorporation- Incorporation is expensive because it usually requires the knowledge and skills of an attorney tocomplete all the paperwork.89© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgMaking Your Business Legal — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Profits not withheld or reinvested are liable to taxation - as are profits used to pay salaries andwages.- If an owner does not own the majority of shares in a corporation, he or she may lose controlof it.Legal Structure 5: Subchapter S CorporationsA Subchapter S Corporation is similar to both a Corporation and an LLC. It is, however, easier tosell stock in an S Corporation than an LLC. The main difference between an S Corporation and aregular corporation, however, is that an S Corporation does not have to pay corporate taxes. Instead,profits and losses are passed on to shareholders who report money made or lost on their individual taxstatements.Make certain the differences of incorporation are fully understood before choosing between anLLC, incorporation, and an S corporation. For example, as a small business owner, some expertssuggest that it’s preferable to set-up an LLC rather than an S Corporation because S Corporations aremore restrictive. Other sources claim that S Corporations are the better choice for those nearingretirement because income can be classified as a dividend. Check with an attorney, accountant, or taxauthority to determine the best option.Advantages of an S Corporation- It is easier to sell stock in an S Corporation- Corporate taxes are not paid.Disadvantages of an S Corporation- Two or more individuals are needed to form an S Corporation- Investors (partners) cannot go after the personal assets of a corporation’s owners if the businessfails- The owners of an S Corporation are financially compensated by the proportion of stock theyown, not by a partnership agreement.Staying Legal (or Keeping Abreast of the Law)Once a business starts off legally it must strive to ensure that it stays that way. In part, thisinvolves being aware of the Latin term ‘Ignorantia legis neminem excusat’, which translates as‘ignorance of the law is no excuse’. All over the world, this dictum is in full legal use. In laymen’sterms what this means is that every town or city has hundreds, if not thousands, of laws that pertainto running a business and entrepreneurs are responsible for complying with all of them. Failure to doso can result in hefty fines, law suits, or expensive days in court. Examples of seemingly innocuousactions that can lead to trouble include:- Posting signs or displaying lights.- Running a business out of a home or apartment.- Placing tables and chairs outside a restaurant (which often requires a special license).- Operating a bed and breakfast that exceeds a certain number of beds (a fire certificate is needed).- Using company vehicles that are over a certain weight (a special operating license may beneeded).- Keeping personal data on customers (this may require registering with authorities).- Selling alcohol, tobacco, or combustibles (which always require special licenses).Since it’s almost impossible to keep track of every law and statute, a good rule of thumb is to not goit alone. Always check with local authorities, local business development centers, or an experiencedbusiness attorney before setting up shop or making any changes to an existing business. Those whooperate under the creed that ‘it’s better to beg forgiveness than ask permission’ are asking for trouble.90© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgMaking Your Business Legal — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- When choosing a business partner, select someone whose strengths balance out yourweaknesses and vice versa.- Avoid trying to save money by registering a business in a city, state, or country where theregistration fees are cheaper. This usually leads to having to pay a second registration fee inorder to comply with local regulations in the region where the business is actually located (this isespecially true in the USA).- Be wary of setting up a business overseas. It’s often very difficult for people to start a businessin a country where they’re not legal residents. The paperwork, bureaucracy, and fee collectionscan be a nightmare.91© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIntellectual property is a collective term that refers to the laws that protect copyrights, trademarks,and patents. It’s a sad fact of life that the world is full of derivative thinkers eager to pounce uponsomeone else’s idea because they can’t come up with one of their own. Acquiring a copyright,trademark, or patent can prevent this from happening to you. That is not to say that these methodsare foolproof -- unfortunately they’re not. They do, however, make it difficult for someone to stealanother person’s efforts and market them under another name.CopyrightA copyright is designed to protect the author of an original, artistic, academic, or literary work in awritten, drawn, or performed format. This includes fictional and non-fictional writing (even on theInternet), architecture, drawings, paintings, sculptures, photographs, films, videos, musical scores,songs, theatrical works, choreography, and computer programs. In a business, advertisements,booklets, brochures, databases, instruction manuals, and price lists also fall under the copyrightumbrella. It’s important to know that although all of these communication vehicles can be protectedby a copyright, ideas themselves cannot be copyrighted. When an idea is written down, however, it issomewhat protected.A copyright protects an original work in what is called a ‘fixed’ (written) format. Keep in mind thatthere is no such thing as an ‘International Copyright Law’; anything that is written down isautomatically covered by copyright in most parts of the world. This means that a person does nothave to register his or her material with a government office in order to own a copyright.Unfortunately, if unregistered material is copied or stolen and used for commercial purposes bysomeone else, the creator of the work will have to prove that it was his or hers first. That’s why it’s agood idea to officially register all material that needs copyrighting. Additional advantages ofregistering original work include:- it provides a public record that states who owns the copyright,- it offers assistance in providing proof of the original owner or creator,- it establishes control over any reproduction of the copyrighted work,- it provides control over any derivative work based on the copyrighted material,- it provides control over the right to display copyrighted work publicly, and,- it offers protection against copied imports of the work from entering the originating country tobe sold under the guise of someone else’s work.Copyright provides protection from the moment a work is verifiably written down until up to 70Chapter 16Protecting Your Businesswith Copyrights,Trademarks,Patents, and UPC CodesThere are two kinds of people, those whowork and those who take the credit.Try to be in the first group, there isless competition there’Indira Gandhi92© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgProtecting Your Business with Copyrights, Trademarks, Patents, and UPC Codes — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessyears beyond the creator’s death. By writing the words ‘protected by copyright’ on a documents orincluding the international copyright symbol (©) a work becomes copyrighted.TrademarksTrademarks protect the logos, names, or slogans associated with a company and are designed toprotect customers from confusing one product or business with another’s. Services can also carry atrademark (which is called a service mark). Note, however, that a trademark does not prevent otherbusinesses from producing something similar to whatever it is that carries the original trademark andselling it under a different name.Trademarks and service marks are provided on a ‘first come, first served’ basis and last for as longas the name, logo, or slogan is used to identify a product or business. It is therefore advisable toregister a trademark as soon as a name, logo, or slogan has been developed – as well as to ensure thatwhat has been designed is not registered by another company. In the United States, for example, thiscan be done with a trademark check by logging on to www.uspto.gov.Whether a trademark or a service mark is used, the name it protects should be claimed asinseparable from an added purpose description. For example, if a cross-town delivery service isknown by the name ‘Zippy’s’, it should include the phrase ‘Cross-Town Information Movers’ in itsadvertising trademark. If not, any company can use the words ‘Cross-Town Information Movers’ in itsname thereby causing confusion and perhaps taking away business from the originating company.This may sound trivial, but the Otis Elevator Company lost its exclusive right to use the word ‘escalator’in its advertising by omitting that word in the text of only one of its advertisements. The infamous adreferred to the company’s product as an ‘Otis’ rather than an ‘Otis Escalator’, which, after a lengthycourt case, allowed every moving staircase manufacturer in the world to use the word ‘escalator’,despite the fact that ‘escalator’ was a word Otis had coined.Registering a trademark or service mark is easy, but it can be a bit on the expensive side. In theUSA, for example the process can cost well over $300. To get started, contact the U.S. Department ofCommerce Patent and Trademark Office in Washington DC (www.uspto.gov) and ask for the correctform.Patents (USA data)A patent protects a ‘fixed’ and unique discovery that changes a field of endeavor. Patents do notprotect ideas, suggestions, or ways of doing business. The purpose of a patent is to protect the rightsto manufacture or produce a product and to provide the ability to stop production or manufacturing ofthat product by another party. There are four categories of patents (each with variations) that can begenerally described as follows:1. Design Patents protect the external appearances of a product that are both innovative andnon-functional (i.e.: they must not be a functional part of the mechanics of the item). In theUnited States, filing fees average $180 and are good for 14 years.2. Plant Patents protect new forms of vegetation that have been produced artificially (for example,a cross between a rose and a tulip). In the USA, filing fees average $400.3. Provisional Patents start the patent process. Provisional patents last for one year, cost around$260, and state that a patent is pending while the instigator decides whether or not to pursue afull patent.4. Utility Patents cover inventions or innovations that are considered unique and functional andthat fit into one of five categories (composition, improvement, machine, manufacturing, orprocess). In the United States, filing fees average $400 and last 20 years.Three Do’s and Don’ts Regarding Patents1. Never discuss a new product with a business, corporation, or manufacturer without first93© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgProtecting Your Business with Copyrights, Trademarks, Patents, and UPC Codes — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesssecuring your rights and speaking with a qualified attorney or patent agent. Patent applicationsare very specific, demand excruciating detail, and contain highly technical legal language. Ifthey’re not filled out properly they can take years to file and result in the wasting of vast sums ofmoney.2. Before a patent can be issued, a detailed (and usually lengthy) search must be done to makecertain the idea is unique and worth patenting. Average patent-process waiting times run intothe years, not months. Be prepared to answer a lot of questions from patent officers and beaware of the costs. Although the filing fees average in the hundreds of dollars, the entire process(due mostly to legal costs) will probably cost thousands of dollars or more.3. If an entrepreneur has developed something unique that requires a patent, the DisclosureDocument Program will help establish a date of ownership (not unlike a registered copyright) toprotect his or her rights during the patent process. This document must be filled out by theinventor and submitted to the Patent and Trademark office where it is kept for two years.Playing It SafeFor a more in-depth look at copyrights, trademarks, and patents (particularly to ensure that nochanges have taken place since the publication of this book), it is strongly recommended that you seekadvice from an attorney, a local chamber of commerce, a small business advisory centre, or a similarqualified organization. Of course, no copyright, trademark, or patent held by a business will providecomplete protection against the claim of another individual or company if it can be proven that thedocuments of the second business predate the first business’s filing. However, if a copyright,trademark, or patent does exist, the business or person that holds proof of earlier registration standson much stronger legal ground.To ensure that your original work is protected, try to establish a paper trail that can be used in courtto prove that an idea, its name, and the product behind it are original by adhering to the following:- Keep track of (and date) meetings, market research, and the names of the people you spoke withabout an idea or product. Maintaining an up-to-date file, notebook, or diary is also a good idea.- Perform a check to determine if your product or business name is not already protected by atrademark.- Have important documents officially notarized.- Periodically take any materials that need protecting and place them in a sealed envelope. Signacross the seal, secure it with transparent tape, and have the envelope placed in the safetydeposit box of a bank or mail it to yourself. If it’s mailed back to you, don’t open it when itarrives. The postmark on the envelope will provide a valid proof of date.- Use registered mail whenever you send out materials, catalogues, or written plans.- Write a nondisclosure agreement and have it signed by those who will be examining, discussing,or testing a private product or idea that is under development. A nondisclosure agreement is awritten agreement that forces a receiver to acknowledge that a product or idea is confidential(examples of nondisclosure agreements are found on the Internet).Obtaining a UPC number and a Bar Code for Your ProductMost retailers will not accept merchandise without a Universal Product Code number (UPC) and abar code. A bar code is the black and white striped badge seen on the back of every product’spackaging. The UPC number sits directly below it. UPC numbers and bar codes are invaluable when itcomes to inventory control. Unfortunately, they do not give a business much legal protection, butthey do provide a unique identification for a business’s products by describing them and their cost in anumerical code. In addition, bar codes and UPC numbers make products look more professional.To obtain a UPC number (which is distributed by a non-profit organization called the Uniform94© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgProtecting Your Business with Copyrights, Trademarks, Patents, and UPC Codes — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessCode Council), contact: www.uc-council.org, click on ‘I Need a UPC Bar Code’, and follow theinstructions. After the forms have been filled out and the fees have been paid, processing takes abouttwo weeks.Advice from the Pros- Take advantage of established legal protection tools (copyright, trademark, and patent) by usingthe international symbols of copyright and trademark on products and written material.- When obtaining a patent, work closely with a professional to ensure that your ideas andintentions are not watered down. Patent attorneys have been known to unwittingly change theclaims on a patent application, thereby rendering the patent less profitable. In addition, someattorneys may be unaware of changes in the law or write legal templates that do not stand up incourt. To protect yourself and your invention, always get a second opinion before filing.- If you have a great business idea and are relying on its uniqueness to bolster its profit potential,try not to publically brag about it. While collecting research for this book, I spoke with a manwho claimed that he once worked for a company that employed an entire department of peoplewho did nothing but forge and falsify documents that predated the original copyrighted filingsof other businesses – thereby allowing the dishonest company to safely use the work of itscompetitors.95© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgMany first-time entrepreneurs don’t realize all the hard work that’s involved in setting up a newbusiness venture. Equally as disconcerting are the moments of self-doubt that many first-timeentrepreneurs – as well as quite a few seasoned professional - experience when things don’t seem to begoing their way. Like it or not, self-doubt, days where one appears to be floundering, or feelings ofbeing overwhelmed are an inseparable part of the entrepreneurial lifestyle for both beginners and prosalike. For example, after many years of business success – and a confidence-instilling vote byManagement Today magazine naming her as one of the UK’s top 30 entrepreneurs - MJM Internationalfounder Michelle Mone admits that there are times, throughout every business day, when she is stillconsumed by moments of despair.Feeling Overwhelmed and its Relation to Time ManagementFeeling overwhelmed is usually a result of either not knowing how to deal with the unknown or theprolonged avoidance of a situation that must be faced. The longer such situations remain unattendedthe worse they tend to get. Most experts agree that a major reason for feeling overwhelmed is notmanaging time effectively. Indeed, virtually every entrepreneur questioned for this book eitherimplied, or outright stated, that he or she wished there were more hours in a day. Of course, nobodycan add more hours to a day, but the 24-hours that are available can often be managed more wisely,which can allow for more to get done (for a reminder of what has to be done, see page 119; How SmallBusiness Owners/Operators Spend Their Time). Following is a compilation of suggestions designed tohelp resolve poor time management practices:- When moments of self-doubt creep in, remind yourself why you’re starting a new businesschallenge and what you want to achieve. Reviewing goals and ambitions can help to re-establishdirection and commitment by examining what needs to be done (and not done) while alsorevealing incremental, manageable steps that will more easily take you where you want to go.- Get in the habit of taking 15 or 20 minutes at the beginning and end of every day to plan aheadand focus. The key to managing time efficiently often lies in structuring the day. Withoutstructure, a business project can easily become a tangled mess of seemingly unrelated tasks.- Make a list of daily and weekly duties and rank them in order of importance.- Next to each duty write down the best or only time to perform it (e.g.: some duties can only bedone in the morning, others only in the evening, or on a Tuesday, etc.).- Examine the big jobs and briefly write down the steps needed to tackle them. Often when a bigjob is seen as a series of stages, it becomes less daunting.- Determine how much time is realistically needed to accomplish regular tasks and odd-job tasks.- Lump together the tasks that can be performed at the same time (For example, going to thebank, picking up shirts from the dry cleaners, shopping for office supplies, and so on. Theseshould be combined into one trip, which prevents having to make several trips).- Set deadlines for task completion. This helps prevent procrastination from setting in.Chapter 17Re-EnergizingWhen you’re in a slump, you’re not in for muchfun.Un-slumping yourself is not easily doneDr. Seuss (Theodor Geisel)96© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgRe-Energizing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Clear all work areas of clutter. An organized work area helps instill concentration.- Attack the most urgent priorities first. Do one task at a time and don’t stop until it’s finished.That way, at least one task will have been tackled no matter how difficult the day becomes.- Don’t keep putting off little things. They add up.- Learn to say no to outside requests for help. Offering a helping hand to friends, co-workers, andneighbors is kind and considerate, but there comes a time when every entrepreneur needs tofocus solely on his or her own responsibilities.- If the time allotted for a task is unrealistic, consider briefly adding more time to your day. Forexample, get up an hour earlier or take less of a lunch break. Adding one hour of extra time toeach workday can provide the equivalent of two extra weeks a year. Just don’t make it a habit.- If you feel extremely overwrought, discuss your situation with a partner or spouse, with a friend,with someone in the same business, or with a professional at a local business developmentcentre. When everything is out in the open and it’s realized that the road ahead is survivable(which is usually the case), negative feelings tend to dissipate.The Warning Signs of Stress and OverworkGiven the choice between living and working, some entrepreneurs find that living is the harder ofthe two. Although long hours of work don’t necessarily cause damage on their own, negativeconsequences can and do set in when endless hours of work begin to take a toll on health orrelationships. Put more succinctly, hard work is necessary to make every business succeed, butoverwork is counterproductive. Without rest or some form of ‘downtime’ weaknesses tend to amplifyand strengths diminish. Whenever an entrepreneur find himself or herself besieged by negativecomments from friends and family about non-stop work habits, or if one or more of the followingsymptoms appear, it’s probably time to step back and take stock of the situation:- irritability or a short temper (particularly during simple, everyday situations such as waiting inline or being caught in traffic),- bad headaches,- sleep disturbances, insomnia, or constant tiredness,- any behavior that is out of character (including having little feeling or emotion),- increased use of drugs, alcohol, caffeine, or cigarettes,- illness (particularly during weekends or holidays),- constant upset stomach,- low morale,- teeth grinding,- an inability to relax – or working endlessly without appearing to tire,- feeling that relaxation is a waste of time or feeling anxious about being away from work, thephone, or a computer,- constantly missing family gatherings or engagements,- sudden weight loss or gain,- lingering flu or colds, and/or,- forgetfulness.Don’t limp through a business start-up in a state of denial. If left untreated, the build-up of stressthat causes these symptoms can lead to more serious disorders including depression, cardiovasculardisease, muscular and skeletal ailments, ulcers, skin problems, allergies, the inflammation of othermaladies (such as diabetes and arthritis), and even cancer. No business dream is worth that.97© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgRe-Energizing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessSuggestions for Eliminating StressFew would dispute that endless amounts of work produce stress or that stress in the form of safeand regular physical exercise is good for the body and mind. However, physical exercise is voluntaryand by its very nature allows the body to rest and rebuild afterwards. Work related stress, on the otherhand, is different. It grips and doesn’t let go, thereby grinding the mind and body down day after day.The humorous response of a bakery owner in Belgium who advised me to tell my readers to ‘takelots of Valium’ if they plan on starting and running a business, attests to the fact that entrepreneursregularly face stress. Yet constantly taking medication to combat stress is not a viable (or healthy)long-term option. Regularly energizing the body and mind is integral to the elimination of stress.Before that can happen, however, one must first recognize that a problem exists. The next step is toaddress the cause (not the symptoms). For example, taking aspirin may reduce a work-inducedheadache, but it will not reduce the cause of the headache. Following are several preventative ways tocontrol stress:- Take charge of work situations. Set personal limits and avoid unrealistic deadlines. No one cangive 100% of his or her physical and intellectual time day after day, month after month withoutsuffering in some way. Control your work - don’t let it control you.- Pace yourself. Stay flexible and slow down.- Periodically stop and relax. If it’s impossible to escape work each evening, find time(s) to relaxthroughout the day, even if all that can be mustered is 15 minutes with your eyes closed (somestudies suggest that the best way to optimize this is to do so while lying on your back on thefloor).- Open up to others. Discuss problems, fears, and frustrations with those who can be trusted. Asthe old adage says, a problem shared is a problem halved.- Do things for others. Selflessness is a great stress alleviator. To reduce tensions and frustrations,think about someone else’s needs and satisfy them.- Exercise regularly. Many experts agree that engaging in regular, measured, safe physical activity isthe most potent stress-buster of all.- Balance work and recreation. Few people die uttering the words, ‘I wish I’d spent more time at theoffice.’ Schedule periods of recreation and quality time apart from work.- Engage in a non-competitive activity that breaks up the monotony of a normal workday. Read a bookabout someone famous, practice yoga or meditation, go hiking, play with your kids, learn to cooka new dish, or visit an art gallery or museum.- Adopt an outside interest or hobby without having it take over your life. In other words, makecertain the hobby is not work related.- Don’t look for relaxation in the form of a bottle. Whether through pills or alcohol, don’t try toescape work pressures via chemically induced means. This will only lead to more problems.- Take a vacation, or, at the very least, take a day or two off. Most business dreams will not crumble ifa few days are taken to relax, unwind, and reinvigorate. The key to eliminating most forms ofstress is to plan the time to relax on a regular basis. As famed psychologist and philosopherErich Fromm once said, ‘a person’s main task in life is to give birth to himself (or herself) and tobecome what he (or she) potentially is…. and the most important product of this effort is thedevelopment of a personality.’ Needless to say, it’s difficult to develop a healthy personality ifevery minute of the day is consumed with work.98© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgRe-Energizing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- Learn to manage time effectively. If you can’t manage your time effectively you probably won’tbe able to effectively manage your business.- No matter what type of project you’re undertaking, remember that any form of progress, nomatter how small or insignificant, is progress and should be considered as such.- Admit that frustrations, false starts, and mistakes are part of the learning process and are oftenjust as important as successes.- Be emotionally mature enough to recognize distractions throughout the workday and strongenough to deny their temptation – both of which can be achieved through practice andrefinement.- Know that no business is worth your health.99© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgLearning about business issues, researching the market, testing a product, putting together abusiness plan, and resolving the hundreds of tasks that have to be dealt with before a business islaunched can take months to complete. At some point, however, the groundwork will have beencompleted and it will be time to set an opening date. This is the day of reckoning – the moment whenthe business is ready to present itself to the public. Of course, it’s ludicrous to throw open the doors ofa business with the expectation that customers will be lining up outside waiting to hand over theirmoney. It doesn’t work that way. As with all aspects of entrepreneurship, opening day requiresforethought and planning and efforts must be made to ensure that customers are primed and ready.With studies showing that most people need to hear about a product three to seven times before theydecide to try it, this means that every entrepreneur has his or her work cut out bombarding the publicwith publicity announcements.Preparing to AdvertiseAdvertising is not a one shot deal. Businesses must advertise on a continuous basis in order to staysolvent and the largest consumer of cash in this endeavor is likely to be the media (e.g.: newspapers,journals, magazines, radio, and television as well as public displays (e.g.: billboards). Once word getsout that you’re looking to advertise, you will probably be visited by hoards of salespeople hoping to sellad space. Don’t be tempted to say yes to these people straight away. Quite a bit of homework needs tobe done first.The downside of advertising (in all its forms) is the sheer amount of it that surrounds us. Theresulting barrage of words, pictures, and sounds often results in the intended audience tuning out.Advertising budgets must therefore be used prudently. For example, it’s probably not sensible toadvertise a product that women use in a magazine designed for men. Local media markets must firstbe checked to ensure that the advertisement (and the medium in which it’s presented), will fit theintended customer base. This is done by determining the most popular mediums and verifying howmuch of the market the medium ‘penetrates’. Such information is readily available to the publicbecause it sets advertising rates. Check with local business development centers or an advertisinggoverning body for sources of media rankings. Additional suggestions include:- Determine the ‘cost per thousand’ (or CPM) before considering buying any advertising space.CPM refers to the overall cost of reaching 1,000 people. To calculate it, take the cost of an adand divide it by the estimated size of the audience (in thousands) of the medium in which the adwill appear (for written publications the audience size is called the circulation number). Theresult provides an indication of how much money it costs to reach 1,000 people – therebyshowing the best value for money- Put together a media/press kit. Write a short, one page, fact-based, ‘media release’ thatexplains your business, what your product does, who the product benefits, and the impact theproduct will have on customers (i.e.: the time and/or money it saves, the safety it provides, etc).Chapter 18Announcing the Existenceof Your BusinessThe difference between involvement andcommitment is like an eggs-and-ham breakfast:the chicken was involved; the pig was committed’Anonymous100© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAnnouncing the Existence of Your Business — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFocus on the benefits the product provides rather than adjectives and fluff (see Chapter 28,Selling 101: Understanding Customer Motivation). Print the benefit message on the back ofbusiness cards, on the side of your business’s vehicle, on shirts and hats – and so on.- Keep an updated notebook that carefully records your advertising budget, your goals,descriptions of various media outlets and their audiences, demographics, dates, and youradvertising strategy. Equally as important, accurately record the results of all your advertisingcampaigns. Future marketing decisions can be weighed against this information.- Stick to the following five principles in all advertisements:1. Promote one message. An ad should convey its message in three seconds or less with a suitabletag line that explains the major benefit of the product (see Chapter 23).2. Strengthen the message with credible claims. Don’t simply state that the product saves time andmoney – show how much time and how much money it saves.3. Test all ads before releasing them. Let four or five competent people judge the ad foreffectiveness. If the response is negative, change the ad. The purpose of an ad is to delightpotential customers, not the ad’s creator.4. Make the ad easy to read and use. Ensure that it contains all necessary contact information -including website and e-mail addresses – along with an incentive for customers to buy theproduct. Make it easy for the effectiveness of the ad to be determined by including a coupon orspecial announcement that enables you to track the results.5. Create curiosity. Many successful advertisements are not designed to sell a product or serviceoutright. Instead, their intention is to generate interest. For example, if an accounting service isbeing offered, rather than state how wonderful the service is, create curiosity by sayingsomething like: ‘If you’re paying more than $5,000 a year in taxes, learn how you can reduce thisamount by 20% or more!’- Consider all advertisement options and benefits (and their costs) before choosing anadvertising medium.- Change ads after they’ve been given a chance to perform. Do not let advertisements getstale, yet at the same time don’t pull them so early that they don’t have time to be effective.Get the Word OutMarketing a business involves much more than advertising. All advertising should becomplimented with other marketing options that are as limitless as your imagination. Tried andtested examples include:- Freebies – free items that are passed out to potential customers obviously have to be paid for, butthe attention they draw often turns heads. Freebies are great for grand opening events (as wellas networking) and include everything from free samples to bookmarks, coupons, refrigeratormagnets, tee-shirts, pens, buttons, drink coasters – or anything useful onto which a logo andbusiness name can be attached.- Local Events – neighborhood gatherings offer wonderful opportunities for targeting specificcustomers and their families. Remember the dog-poop collection businesses mentioned inChapter 3? One enterprising business owner in this industry dressed up in a superman costumeand attended a dog show where he passed out business cards. He drew so much attention thathe didn’t need to do much advertising after that.- Mail Outs – although sending out brochures, postcards, letters, or leaflets in a direct mailcampaign is both time consuming and expensive, mail-outs can help follow up with customersthat have already expressed an interest in your business. Mass mail-outs not targeted to aspecific clientele typically generate a response rate of 1%-3% so the results may not be worth theeffort. Knowing the details of the intended recipients beforehand is a good way to increase the101© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAnnouncing the Existence of Your Business — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessodds of success. Unfortunately, collecting addresses can take months, printing costs are high,stamps have to be purchased, and collating and folding and stuffing material into envelopes cantake days to complete. To facilitate success, establish a database of bonafide names andaddresses before attempting a direct-mail campaign - and include an incentive for the recipientto respond rapidly (for example, taking five-percent off prices if the customer responds withintwo weeks).- Social Media – Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest and other e-mediums have their place, butdon’t rely on them too much without backing them up with more substance. This is explained inmore detail on page 106 (‘Don’t rely on social media’) and page 134 (The false Illusion Inherent inDigital).- Press Releases – newspapers, magazines, newsletters, and television and radio stations areconstantly on the lookout for new stories. Is your business opening in a depressed area? Is itservicing needy clients? Perhaps you’re planning to donate your products or services to anorphanage or hospital. Or maybe your business or its marketing methods are so unique theyconstitute a story all their own. Whatever the angle, no one in the media will know what you’redoing unless you make the first move. Try to locate a reporter or a journalist that specializes inyour field or industry and give him or her materials from your media/press kit (journalists canbe notoriously sloppy with facts and figures so providing them with this information will helpenormously). If the interest of a journalist can’t be attracted, consider writing an article instead.Remember, don’t make your product the central theme of the story. The message is in thebenefit(s) your product provides to the community. Remember also to write the article usingthe same style the publication uses. Editors love text that resembles their own work.- Promotional Tie-Ins – Can your product compliment or enhance that of another business orevent? If so, keep in mind that other businesses have client lists, mailing lists (including emaillists), and newsletters that may be of benefit. To tap into these resources, find out how theother enterprise will profit from collaboration (always approach a promotional tie-in schemefrom this angle). For example, if your product is aimed at youngsters, show a local school how itcan be used to enhance a scholastic activity program. Similarly, perhaps your product or servicewill benefit the members of a local association or club. If so, donate some time to theseorganizations in exchange for a mention in their advertising literature.- Speaking Engagements - consider speaking at conferences, seminars, toastmaster meetings, orsimilar gatherings that will benefit from your product. This method of face to face contact isexceptionally helpful in promoting service businesses.Grand OpeningsContrary to popular belief, the term ‘grand opening’ does not refer solely to the first day a businessbegins trading. Grand opening styled extravaganzas can be used to introduce new product lines,promote a new refurbishment, announce a major sale, or take advantage of an upcoming event.Obviously, some businesses may not benefit from a clown passing out free balloons however, iffavorable attention can be directed toward a product through a carnival atmosphere it may be wise tooffer one. Just bear in mind that once the date for a grand opening has been publicized it must bemet.The following steps will help ensure that a grand opening goes smoothly:1. Before setting a date, investigate and write down the types of customers wanted, how many arewanted, and how much they will buy. This helps provide direction, aim, and planning. Bereasonable, however, when it comes to targeting customers. The worst grand opening I ever sawwas a costly event where invitations were sent only to physicians and lawyers because thesepeople were the only customers the business owner wanted. Needless to say, no one (and Imean no one) showed up despite the fact that an elaborate and expensive buffet and drinks table102© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAnnouncing the Existence of Your Business — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesshad been laid out and a violin quartet had been hired. (When it comes to opening a business theappropriate expression is ‘beggars can’t be choosers’)2. Determine an opening day budget and stick to it. Resist the temptation to spend more moneythan what can be afforded. Some experts insist that the single greatest mistake a small businesscan make is to over-stretch its budget by advertising in expensive mediums that do not reachintended customer bases (see Step 1).3. Avoid launching a new product or business on the same day as a major event (a sports game, aparade, a major holiday, a public anniversary, etc.). Unless your business will enhance suchevents, it will be in direct competition with them.4. Consider holding a grand opening a few weeks after the business has actually opened. Accordingto some practitioners, this gives the business time to ‘iron out its wrinkles’.5. Whenever possible, invite government officials or local dignitaries and personalities to theopening. Doing so almost always guarantees media coverage.6. Contact local radio stations and tell them about the grand opening. Most radio stations lovepromoting local events, particularly if a carnival atmosphere is involved and freebies are handedout. Offer to put up posters or hand out promotional materials for the media in return for theirparticipation.7. Use as many ‘grassroots’ methods as possible to attract attention. This includes the distributionof flyers and invitations, using the phone book to make marketing calls, putting up posters, andso on. Be creative.8. If possible, pair up with a charitable cause and let it promote itself at your grand opening. Bypooling resources with an established charity the chances of customer attendance increases andthe business may be seen as a welcome addition to the community.9. Always provide an incentive for people to take time from their busy schedules to attend theopening (e.g.: hand out coupons, offer special discounts, provide drinks and refreshments, holda raffle, etc).10. Offer something for everyone such as coffee for adults; balloons or sweets for children, andsnacks, decals, and tee-shirts for everyone in between. Everyone that comes should feelwelcome.11. Use the grand opening to its full potential. Show off the business’s personalized service,network with customers, work on creating or enhancing a customer data base, collect businesscards – in short, do everything possible to strengthen customer contacts.12. Collect e-network connection information from potential customers (email addresses, Twitteraccounts, etc).13. Keep a file and record the results of what happened. This prevents having to ‘re-invent thewheel’ every time a marketing idea is needed. It also allows the business to dissect and analyzewhat was attempted, what failed, and what was accomplished.Advice from the Pros- Ask customers how they heard of your business. This helps determine the accuracy andeffectiveness of advertising.- Reprint successful ads and use them as flyers and posters.- Always encourage customers to comment on your business. You may be able to use thecomments later to add credibility to your advertising.- Make sure that your employees know about your advertising efforts, the specials you’re offering,and the types of customers you’re expecting before you go public. Uneducated, ill-prepared,and/or uninformed employees will always nullify the effects of marketing efforts.103© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWhether a business is a gift shop selling odds and ends, a car washing service that sells cleaningproducts, or a restaurant that displays chocolates in a case near the front door, this chapter can be used tobring out the most in in-house sales. Look over the suggestions carefully. With a little imagination manyof the proposals listed herein can either be used as is or be altered to achieve the ultimate businessobjective – a sale. Just bear in mind that there’s no middle ground here. The answer to each questionmust be 100% ‘yes’. Any other response is a ‘no’.In – House Marketing (marketing performed inside the business)Point Of Sale AreaThe point-of-sale area is where maximum customer flow occurs. To ensure a peaceful, informativeand professional selling environment, evaluate whether the business meets the following criteria:yes / no Adequate space to allow for efficient presentation of products on sale.yes / no A set-up and service that minimizes delays and queues.yes / no Clean, well lit display units allowing customers to examine products in a relaxedmanner.yes / no Careful product arrangement to avoid distractions during the point of sale.yes / no Walls cleared of clutter and signs, which denotes that staff are too timid to confrontcustomers (poor sign examples include: clean area after use, we don’t take credit,etc…).yes / no Careful placing of essential products so that customers pass by when and where theyare most likely to purchase them.yes / no Pleasing colors and background music in keeping with the image of the business.In-Store PromotionPromoting inside a business is crucial. When customers are physically inside a business they are rightwhere the business wants them to be. Check the following to maximize eye-catching in-housepromotions:yes / no Special offers relating to specific product lines.yes / no Personalities invited to attend functions that will attract customers to the business(there are plenty of well known people in their field who will come and give a seminaror promote something in exchange for the publicity and the price of a plane ticket).yes / no Internal/external customer competitions offering attractive prizes or incentives tothose who boost sales (for example, the person bringing in the most payingcustomers, or whichever customer buys the most of a certain product wins a prize).yes / no Merchandise on display with the business’s logo – such as key chains, coffee mugs,tee-shirts, bumper stickers, etc (which can also be used for prizes and give-aways).yes / no Provision of adequate promotional literature - leaflets, brochures, signs, coupons (seethe section below titled ‘Unique Selling Points’).Chapter 19A Front-Line Marketing andPromotion ChecklistWhen your work speaks for itself, don’t interruptHenry J. Kaiser104© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Front-Line Marketing and Promotion Checklist — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessIn-Store AdvertisingAgain, the place where potential customers are valued most is inside a business. Once they’re there, usethe business environment to its maximum by evaluating the following:yes / no Professional posters displaying product names and a message.yes / no Staff uniforms neat, clean, and always worn.yes / no Professional displays to promote products, deals, promotions, and services.yes / no A well-informed, well-trained staff that knows what it’s doing as well as what’s going on.yes / no Well-stocked staff work areas (for example, what message does a business send out if apen or other simple tool can’t be found when and where it’s needed?).Internal Public RelationsIndicate which of the following options has put into place:yes / no Introduction of a suggestion box where customers can anonymously deposit theirremarks.yes / no Introduction of a house journal, news letter, or pamphletyes / no The arrangement of social events for customers and their families.yes / no Introducing incentives to reward employee productivity, customer loyalty, etc…yes / no Offering special discounts or services to employees (if employees use your productsthey’ll encourage others to use them too).yes / no Providing effective training opportunities for employees (including letting employeesattend seminars, lectures, and personal-growth workshops).yes / no Letting employees participate in decision making processes (particularly in the settingup of programs they have created or have a keen interest in).Out-of-House Marketing (marketing done outside the business)Unique Selling PointsCapitalize on what sets your business apart from others by evaluating it in terms of the following:yes / no Do you have a trained and enthusiastic staff that helps sell your business outside ofwork hours?yes / no Do you have a champion or award winner on board? Is he/she mentioned in youradverts?yes / no Does your business offer competitive prices?yes / no Do you offer an accessible and convenient location (with ample parking)?yes / no Do you offer attractive peripheral services (i.e.: late or early openings, delivery,installation)yes / no Do you host special events (‘open house’ days, sales, parties, get togethers, etc.)?yes / no Do you provide adequate promotional literature in the form of leaflets, brochures, signs,coupons (it might be a good idea to have several different types – each targeting aspecific clientele; for example, one for walk-ins, one for corporate memberships, one forseniors or students...)?yes / no Do you use testimonials from satisfied customers for advertising and promotion?Community RelationsCheck to see if the business participates in the following initiatives (remember to inform the mediaabout them):105© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Front-Line Marketing and Promotion Checklist — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessyes / no Donations to local charitable causes (along with a story to the media stating this).yes / no Development of good relations with local media owners.yes / no Introduction of products/services to the local needy community (for example ahealth club’s facilities could be made available to a cardiac patient unit, aphysiotherapy businesses, a school or college, a community center, and so on…).yes / no Introduction of special events or special days where the community can be exposedto the business’s operations.yes / no Do you participate in local event sponsorship (with full advertising rights)?yes / no Have you established favorable contacts with local council members and/orchamber of commerce members?Direct Sales CampaignsEvaluate the business’s performance on the following sales techniques:yes / no Selling directly to the customer (i.e.: direct mailings, personal visits, sales calls,etc…).yes / no Target marketing select individuals with advertising paraphernalia (dropping offselect-specific brochures at companies, public venues, sport shops, waiting/reception areas, the local tourist information centre, student unions, etc…).yes / no Establishing social media accounts (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, etc) todisplay the business and its special offers.yes / no Target marketing groups (personal visits to local clubs, athletic teams, popularmeeting places, local company functions, and so forth to let them know of yourspecial group prices).yes / no A booth at trade exhibits or fairs.yes / no Press releases (100 or 200 words sent to the media regarding information yourbusiness considers newsworthy).yes / no Invitations to the media (or other notables) to come look over, try, and mentionyour product/service.Indirect Sales CampaignsDoes the business have (or do) the following:yes / no Sponsorship/advertising space at local sports venues or with local team programs.yes / no Media advertising (Note: With television, radio, and newspapers, first ascertainwhat demographic market they reach and if they match the target market of thebusiness. The operators of these mediums do have this information.).yes / no Trade and technical journal advertising.yes / no Advertising in special interest magazines or coupon booklets to reach your targetaudience, (e.g.: tourist pamphlets, student/university publications, etc…).yes / no Neon/lighted signs located outside and/or hanging over the sidewalk for all to see.If a business can’t answer ‘yes’ to the majority of these questions, it’s selling itself short andsomething needs to be done about it.Suggestions for Ensuring that Marketing Attempts Obtain Results- Don’t make the task too complicated and don’t go it alone. The simpler the approach and the morepeople that are involved the better.106© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Front-Line Marketing and Promotion Checklist — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Have fun. What you come up with will reflect the atmosphere and environment from whence itcame.- Avoid the typical marketing mistake of falling in love with your own advertising. The point ofadvertising is to attract customers, not to design something that appeals to the business. Allmarketing efforts should marry the benefits being sought by paying customers with what isbeing offered. Do you know why your current customers come to your business to begin with?- Don’t count on cleverness to attract customers. The most effective marketing campaigns don’t comefrom dazzling advertisements and eye-catching slogans. Businesses that bring in the mostcustomers are usually the ones that do the most work to personally connect with customers (seepages 120-125).- Don’t rely on social media. Companies spend billions of dollars a year to establish and maintain asocial media presence, but a recent 2017 study of social media marketing by Harvard Universitydiscovered that social media doesn’t work the way marketers think it does. Indeed, the studyfound that ‘liking’ a product or service on Facebook (the world’s dominant social network) ‘doesnot increase a customer’s behavior or lead to increased purchasing, nor does it spur purchasingincreases from friends’. The study concluded by affirming that a ‘survey of 427 marketers in U.S.companies showed that 80% are unable to quantify the value of their social media efforts.Furthermore, in a study of Fortune 500 companies, ‘87% of (chief marketing officers)acknowledged that they can’t document that social media creates new customers’ (mostlybecause marketers are using it the wrong way). The solution? Social media efforts should becombined and amplified with advertising and other marketing promotions that are specificallydesigned to generate higher returns on social media investment (time being the primaryinvestment). In other words, the key to using social media successfully is to create opportunitiesthat personally connect with a business’s most-loyal customers (see Chapter 22; specificallypages 121-125). If you still don’t get it, look at it this way: social media is most effective when it’sused as a two-way street that establishes a real-time feedback dialogue with customers; it is leasteffective when it’s used as a cheap way to send out inert messages to large numbers of people.(John, Emrich, and Schwartz, 2017)- Learn from your results. If a marketing campaign is a success - find out why. Don’t walk awaywith the notion that similar success will be enjoyed again in the future.- If a marketing campaign isn’t a success, find out why. Sometimes only one ingredient is missing. Asthe saying goes, those who fail often never realize how close to success they came. Avoid the oldchestnut, ‘I tried that once and it didn’t work.’ If you do your research, know your customers,and everyone involved pulls in one direction – your marketing efforts will work.Advice from the Pros- Ask suppliers for advice as to how the merchandise they supply you with can best be sold. Muchmoney, time, experience and effort is usually behind this advice so use it to your advantage.- No matter how young (or small) a business is, if it acts and looks professional it will be perceivedas being successful.- Invest in your marketing schemes as you would any promising business venture.- Try to learn something new everyday about your business and your customers by listening toemployees and customers.- Never stop developing ways and means that make your business different from its competition.- Never miss an opportunity to ask a customer for a product, service, or improvement idea.- Fully train all your employees and regularly check on their progress. Under-trained employeesare guaranteed sales-killers. Having employees answer ‘I don’t know’ to basic customerinquiries is a sure way to lose a sale.107© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgA Front-Line Marketing and Promotion Checklist — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- If you want employees to follow your rules and training methods they will have to be writtendown. Unwritten rules and guidelines cannot be enforced.- Endeavor to set up your business in a way that – as much as possible - it sells itself.- Good products do not sell themselves. They need promoting.108© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIf customers are the lifeblood of every business then employees are its brain and muscle.The money customers pay in exchange for goods and services is the reason why a business exists.Employees are the people who carry out the activities that make up a business and ultimatelydetermine the direction the business goes. Yet before a business’s employees can or will work togetherto serve customers, a sense of order and discipline has to be established. Traditionally this has usuallyincluding the formulation of a hierarchical pyramid which shows where everyone is in relation to thebusiness (see figure 20-1):Figure 20-1Executive ManagementMiddle ManagementOperations SupervisorsService Level EmployeesThe problem with this illustration, however, is that there appears to be no room in it for payingcustomers. When asked where customers fit into a chart like this, most people assume that they’relanguishing somewhere at the bottom below service level employees (an all-too-typical scenario inmost businesses).What would happen if a different approach were taken? What if a business inverted its hierarchicalpyramid so that its paying customers become the most important part of its hierarchical pyramid?(see figure 20-2)Chapter 20Developing Customers and EmployersAn ounce of prevention isworth a pound of cure.’.Anonymous109© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFigure 20-2External Customers(Paying Customers)Service Level EmployeesOperations SupervisorsMiddle ManagementExecutive ManagementFrom this perspective, an upside-down, pyramid-shaped organizational chart displays theimportance of often disregarded service-level employee and the customers they serve (see Chapter 24).Additionally, it demonstrates that those at the bottom of the chart should focus on providing for thoseabove. In other words, every employee shares a common purpose – to serve and satisfy the top of thechart.Evaluating Customers and EmployeesThe evaluation of customers and employees on a regular basis reveals the value that each is offeringthe business. With paying customers, evaluation means recording the amount of money customersspend, keeping track of the types (and volume) of products being bought, remembering likes anddislikes, and noting what is going on in their lives or businesses to better determine the products orservices they’ll need in the future. With employees, evaluation means keeping track of progress andachievements, mistakes, bad behavior, discovering who needs additional training, determining whocan handle more responsibility, or sometimes, regrettably, who needs to be let go.Establishing a Customer DatabaseA customer database is a tool that records the buying habits of regular paying customers. Gatheringthis information is crucial – as is making it accessible to employees. Working separately, employeesmay not be aware of the whole customer picture, but with a database they should be able to put onetogether. When answers to the questions in a database are unknown, perhaps a good solution is tosimply ask the customer to supply them. This is best accomplished through attentive contact thatflatters the customer by making him or her feel important. It needn’t be (and shouldn’t be) aninterrogation.Why is customer information important? Consider the wisdom of John Bond, former chairman ofHSBC (one of the world’s most successful banks). With no university education and no real workexperience, Bond jumped onboard a ship and performed menial jobs to pay his way to Asia. UponDeveloping Customers and Employers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business110© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDeveloping Customers and Employers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessarriving, he worked his way into an entry-level position at HSBC and eventually climbed to the topposition. ‘What is the secret of your success?’ an interviewer once asked him. ‘Regardless of thepositions I’ve held, I’ve always known my top 200 customers,’ Bond replied. ‘I know their names, Iknow their businesses and I know their likes and dislikes. I know what they’ve done in the past and Iask what they expect in the future – and with that information I serve them better.’As with most good business practices, keeping track of customers by setting up a customerdatabase is not complicated (software programs are available). Most are quite simple and record datasuch as:1. Customer Specifics- Name, Address, Age, Gender, Profession...- Geographic location and/or their demographics- Economic information (such as income level)- Basic needs and requirements2. Purchasing History- Long term or short term- Type and amount of product purchased- Brand loyalty- Reason for buying (price, convenience, a spur of the moment decision, etc.)3. Future Prospects- What are the customer’s future plans?- What might he/she/they need in the future?- What type of future expenditures is the customer likely to make?- How much can they spend? How much will they save by buying from us?4. Other Pertinent Questions- How did the customer hear about us?- What does the customer need that we currently don’t offer?- How can our service be improved?- Is the customer difficult? (explain)Developing and Enhancing EmployeesFew activities are more important in a business than the training of employees. Educatingemployees helps ensure that they perform their duties correctly. Time and again, during theinterviews conducted for this book, successful entrepreneurs stated that the more time they spendtraining employees, the fewer problems their businesses have as a result (In fact, 87% said thatemployee training is either important or very important in the running of a successful business).Ironically, however, many of these same business owners complained that they never have enoughtime to train their employees - while lamenting in the same breath that much of their time is spentsupervising, correcting, and admonishing poor performance.Employee training is an unending process that requires time and investment. The reward, however(a well-trained staff that does not make mistakes and can think for itself), is well worth it. Followingare the types of approaches that employee training can take:- Apprenticeships: assigning an employee to serve as an assistant or understudy to a skilled workerfor a set period of time.- Coaching: having an experienced person watch, study, and advise employees before graduallysetting them off on their own.111© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDeveloping Customers and Employers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Job rotations: a much praised method of training (or training enhancement) in which employeesperiodically switch jobs to learn how the organization works as a whole and to learn other tasks.The benefits of job rotation include shaking things up, the creation of new ideas, developingrespect for others, eliminating boredom, and always having skilled workers on hand.- Off the job training: sending an employee off-site to attend education sessions, seminars, orworkshops. Employees usually view this as a reward.- Mentoring: the act of transferring insight and experience from a seasoned worker to a juniorworker when it is needed, or asked for, by the junior worker.- Modeling: having an experienced person demonstrate to a newcomer how to do a task.Never underestimate the importance of training. The more time and attention that is given to anemployee as training, the better off your business will be.Monitoring Employees (Job Evaluations)Job evaluations let employees know if they’re going in the right direction while providing insightwhen it comes time to determining if an employee needs additional training (or perhaps a reprimand).Evaluations should be performed regularly, written legibly, and stored in a safe place to reflectseriousness on the part of the business. Against the information collected, progress can be measured.Most experts suggest that evaluations should not be viewed as a negative practice, but rather as ameans of two-way communication. When performed in this manner, evaluations are difficult to turninto reprimand sessions. They’re also an excellent way to reward good performance when things aregoing well. Most evaluations take into consideration:- Overall job performance,- Work output and quality.- Views from colleagues,- Social skills (including the employee’s attitude toward work and co-workers),- Punctuality and attendance,- …and the views or opinions of the person being evaluated.Work evaluations should avoid:- Judgment on one trait (good or bad),- The ignoring of past performance by only judging recent work standards (this keeps theemployee from ‘pouring on the goods’ right before evaluation time),- Personal bias,- Grading, and,- Marking everyone as average.Dealing with Consistently Poor PerformanceMany of the entrepreneurs who contributed to this book agreed that 95% of the blame for pooremployee performance usually lies squarely on a manager’s shoulders. (‘Who hired the employee, whodidn’t train him, or who didn’t get rid of him when he turned out bad?’ said one contributor). Withthis in mind, try finding answers to the following questions when faced with an employee who showsconsistently poor performance:- Does the employee have a reason for his/her poor performance?- Has proper training been provided?- Is the employee being subjected to bullying by colleagues?- Have proper motivational tactics and/or incentives been administered?- Is the employee suffering from outside (personal) pressures?112© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgDeveloping Customers and Employers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Is the employee working in a suitable department, field or area?- Is some form of punishment necessary? (Note: Termination is not a punishment. The processof firing an employee for poor performance is an act of finality after all else has failed.)Nothing Recedes Like SuccessIt is ridiculous to expect customers and employees to remain loyal without giving them anything inreturn. Equally as important, customers and employees are unique human beings that cannot betreated like clones. Customers and employees require immediate, individualized attention themoment they enter a business. To maximize what is desired from both customers and employees,keep written records and use these records to prevent problems. Doing so will help eliminate theexpensive, time-consuming practice of constantly working to replace dissatisfied customers andemployees.Advice from the Pros- Although beggars can’t be choosers, there are some customers you’re better off without (e.g.:those whose demands cost more than what they give in return). Perform a background checkbefore taking on a long-term customer.- Check the reliability and reputation of paying customers before extending credit. Don’t allowthe rush of enthusiasm and goodwill that usually accompanies a big sale to cloud your judgment.- New businesses have to grovel for customers. Never forget that.- Don’t focus solely on big name customers who have lots of money. While there is nothingwrong with aiming high, don’t neglect smaller clients.- The best employee candidates are usually the ones who hunger most for work – not the oneswith the most education or experience.- Showing commitment and integrity to employees pays off. How you treat your employees (andyour customers) is often the standard as to how they will treat you.- Never rely implicitly on one external customer. Circumstances beyond your control can lead tothe bankruptcy of your business if that one customer is lost.- Be careful with those you choose to trust. People (or businesses) you have known for years cansteal, lie, overcharge, or otherwise engage in dishonest practices when you least expect it. Bealert.113© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPART IIIBUSINESS & MANAGERIALBASICS114© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.org At some point in every new business, the ethereal ideas and creative spirit behindentrepreneurship will collide with the down-to-earth realities and practical logistics of management.So perhaps the best way to present a rich and accurate concept of management is to look at what goodmanagers do – or are supposed to do – in the course of a typical working day. To begin with, goodmanagers constantly streamline their organizations toward making a sale. In other words, goodmanagers keep their organizations on track by ensuring that everything that’s being done is ethicallygeared towards providing what customers want. In this regard, a good manager is responsible forreducing ambiguity, keeping costs down, eliminating waste, and motivating others to do the same.Good managers take educated risks and exercise good judgment. These risks include trying newthings, successfully adjusting to change, developing subordinates (good managers aren’t afraid ofletting other people shine - in fact they encourage it), and improving their own skills.Since most managers are responsible for more work than one person can normally perform, a goodmanager also delegates and integrates his or her work (or the work of others) by acting as a clearchannel of communication within the business that he or she serves. Good management is thereforeabout rising above the often monotonous grind of a working day and injecting motivation, creativity,discipline, and enthusiasm into areas in which they either don’t exist or they’re not wanted. Successfulmanagement entails doing difficult and time-consuming tasks a manager does not want to do in orderto get the results he or she wants. And while all that’s going on, the ups and downs of life have to bedealt with including fear, insecurity, births, deaths, romances, divorces, physical injuries, bad hair days,bad-manner days, personal failings, and attitude problems to name just a few. Again, I’m talking aboutgood management. People who are good managers face problems rather than run from them, put inlong productive hours, set a good example, and have an inherent knack to create something fromnothing. Good managers work well with others (including those they don’t like) and they can becounted on to be honest and upstanding. They concentrate on goals and results rather than showingeveryone who’s boss because the creed they live by is integrity, responsibility, and maturity. This meansfinancial figures aren’t manipulated and production numbers aren’t fiddled. Of course that’s not to saythat good managers always score; they most certainly do not. But when good managers don’t succeedthe first time, they pick themselves up, brush themselves off, learn from what happened, and thenscore. Good managers create value; they don’t make excuses or blame others, they produce results.Sound like a tall orde at makes management so difficult to define – let alone do.Chapter 21ManagementIf you want to test a man’scharacter give him power.Abraham LincolnI don’t know what your destiny will be, butone thing I do know; the only onesamongst you who will be happy are thosewho have sought and found how to serve.Albert Schweitzer (at a graduation ceremony)115© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Two Choices of ManagementWhat will you do, as the manager of a business, when faced with work-related questions orproblems? In most instances, by understanding that only one of two choices is available. This is notan exaggeration. There are no shades of grey here and there is no middle ground. The first choice is toserve your business’s customers. The second choice is for the manager to serve himself or herself, whichmeans allowing insecurity, incompetence, ego, or greed – or a combination thereof – to prevail.Serving a business’s customers involves finding out what they want (as well as how, when, andwhere they want it) and then moving heaven and earth to provide it. Serving customers also involvesfinding good people (employees, suppliers, contractors, and other stakeholders), educating (training)them, and giving them what they need so that they know the requirements of the business, the ownerknows their requirements, and the two can serve each other. The end result, if all goes well, is thatpaying customers are served best and everyone prospers as a result. Any other act or behavior issimply self-defeating.For example, if an employee or a paying customer approaches you with a good idea and youimmediately say ‘no’, you’re probably serving your ego (saying no is the quickest way to let everyoneknow that you’re the boss). If you say ‘no’ because you’re not sure how or if the idea will work, theninsecurity is being served (a major part of any manager’s job is to find out how new ideas can work). Ifyou say ‘no’ because implementing the idea will involve additional work (as new ideas often do), you’reserving your incompetence. And if you say ‘no’ because the idea will allow someone else to shine,you’re serving greed (not to mention ego and insecurity as well).Graphically, the two choices of management look like this.Second choice: Serving the ManagerFirst choice: Serving CustomersEgoInsecurityExternal Customers(paying customers)End result: Serving the BusinessEnd result: Serving the ManagerIncompetenceInternal Customers (employees,suppliers, stakeholders, etc.)GreedThe Two Choices of Management: A Case StudySeveral years ago, a woman who had been named as the director of a large international charity forunderprivileged children invited me to a dinner party at her home. Seated at the table was a long-timefriend of hers, a man from a prominent family who owned a successful marketing firm. During themeal he mentioned that he loved to make donations to worthy causes. ‘Whatever you need I’ll beManagement — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business116© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManagement — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesshappy to provide it for free,’ he said. ‘I love doing pro bono work for charities.’‘No thank you,’ the hostess replied, ‘that’s not the way we do things where I work.’A moment of stunned silence followed. Here was a charity being offered tens of thousands ofdollars worth of expertise (possibly more), with no strings attached, yet its new director had turnedthe offer down flat. Obviously, she was not serving her customers (starving children) by turning downsuch a contribution. Make no mistake, she is a lovely person, highly intelligent, university educated, ajoy to be around, and honest to a fault. And before I continue, let it be known that the donation shewas offered was both genuine and sincere. So why did she let her customers down and who is sheserving by doing so?Knowing this person fairly well, it’s safe to say that she’s not greedy. If she had said ‘yes’ in order toconduct an act of embezzlement or to otherwise steal the limelight from someone, than she could beaccused of greed, but that is not the case here.Was her ego responsible? Perhaps. Too many managers seem to believe that turning down newideas immediately shows that they’re the boss. In other words, saying ‘no’ is a quick way to feed ahungry ego.Is she incompetent? Obviously, she didn’t know how to handle the donation (perhaps because shehad never been offered one like it before), which is a fair enough mistake for any new manager tomake. Unfortunately, since she didn’t bother to find out how the donation could be put to use beforemaking her decision, her action typifies incompetence. A manager’s job is to learn how to do oldthings in new ways as well as to explore new ways to serve customers better – not to maintain thestatus quo.Is she insecure? Absolutely. In fact, she admitted during dinner that she was having difficultylearning her new responsibilities. Insecure managers often say no to untried suggestions becausethey’re unsure of the outcome if they say yes. They therefore play it safe. Saying no also has anotherbenefit. It prevents a manager from having to do more work, which new ideas and suggestions almostalways initiate.The bottom line is that our hostess was serving a number of her inner needs – none of whichinvolved her customer base.The Biggest Obstacle of All: EgoIn his book, How to Succeed in Business by Breaking All the Rules, author Dan Kennedy relays a truestory about managers and their egos and how the latter can end up destroying a perfectly goodbusiness. As Kennedy describes it, a few years ago a Fortune 500 corporation bought a small, highlyprofitable company and hired a consultant to investigate how the company could make even moremoney. The consultant dutifully finished his study and reported back to the corporation, telling itsadministrators how disorganized, inefficient, and undisciplined he thought this highly successful smallcompany was. In particular, he described how the company’s top salesman showed up some days atseven o’clock in the morning and other days at ten o’clock. This same man read the racing forum andcalled his bookie during office hours. He took a coffee break after every call, spent incredible amountsof time wandering around joking with everyone, and even took naps. What the consultant did notmention, of course, was that this employee was the highest producer in the business. He rarely lost asale and his monthly sales average beat that of every other employee by four to one. Rather thaninvestigate further, the Fortune 500 bigwigs dutifully dispatched one of their top managers, a formermilitary officer, to whip the small company into shape by laying down the law, giving everyone strictnew schedules to adhere to, and so on. As a result, the top salesperson left. Ninety days later, salesdropped by over 33%. Shortly thereafter, the corporation sold its new acquisition for less than half ofits original cost. The moral of the story? By focusing on exerting its will (i.e.: serving its ego) ratherthan producing results (i.e.: serving customers) everyone lost.117© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManagement — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessCommon Management StylesFor many managers, power is mostly wielded through trial and error. The style that worked wellenough in the past is then dragged out and used again. And again. The number of management stylesthat exist are probably too numerous to list, however, acclaimed management researcher CharlesHandy has classified six of the most common ones as follows:1. Force is the crudest method of influencing others. It derives from pure authority and rangesfrom outright threats to bullying and violence.2. Rules and Procedures. Setting down concrete rules and guidelines is another time-honored way tocontrol others and is often the favored method of bureaucracies.3. Exchange. Bargaining, negotiating, cajoling, and bribery fall under this category. Promotions,pay increases (bonuses), rewards, and recognition are more subtle examples.4. Persuasion is usually the first method of choice used by managers. In practice, however, it’susually contaminated by one of the other methods mentioned here.5. Ecology is the use of environmental surroundings to exercise influence. This includes wieldingpower in a crisis. For example, three common ecological moments that can be capitalized uponby most managers include: 1) when negotiating a contract, 2) during the first six months ofemployment, and, 3) during any moment of crisis.6. Magnetism is sometimes witnessed in its abuse stages by sales people, faith healers, and religiousfundamentalists. Personal charisma and cultivating followers are key.So Which Style is Best… and When Should It Be Used?One of the biggest dilemmas managers face is when to use these styles (or a variant thereof) toproduce results. Unfortunately, one size does not fit all. Successful solutions are relative to the peopleinvolved and the situation encountered. What works for one manager may or may not work foranother. Equally, what works one day may not work the next. For example:- Using force or fear may achieve immediate results, but the results could be short-lived and lead tohigh employee turnover.- Rules and procedures can effectively control behavior, but often drain a workplace of creativity,spontaneity, and morale.- The exchange method can prove to be a good motivator, but what happens when everyone expectssome type of reward in exchange for doing a task? The result can be expensive, time consuming,and/or produce a lack of respect for management.- With excessive use of the ecology method, managers might be seen as opportunistic or conniving.- As for magnetism, well, as the expression says, ‘you can fool some of the people some of the time…but not all of the people all of the time.’Management is about Doing What is Best for the BusinessManagement theories tend to ebb and flow like tides (indeed, dozens have been documented overthe past 50 years), but one of the best, and one with which numerous business owners interviewed forthis book have personally used to great effect, is known by the acronym MBWA (Management ByWalking Around). The idea behind MBWA is simple: to reduce the distance between management andemployees and strengthen the relationship (and understanding) between the two. Just as the namesuggests, MBWA demands that managers get out of their ‘bubble’ and walk around the shop floor. Asauthor Richard Pascal explains, the point is not to interfere with employees, but get drawn into reality(or, as he puts it, get grounded). Too often management lives and operates within its own perceptionsof what is right or wrong, rather than in what is real. The result manifests itself into various forms ofmisunderstanding, miscommunication, anger, and resentment. However, when contact between amanager and an employee is void of fear and apprehension, communication is strengthened. The118© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManagement — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessresult is a clearer understanding of what best motivates paying customers and employees. MBWA alsohas the ability to reduce managerial arrogance and allow managers to see what’s going on in theirbusiness without having it filtered by someone else. And if what is seen is far enough out of line withwhat was previously believed, then a manager is forced to update his or her thinking. That’s whenprogress is made. MBWA is not designed as a means of constantly looking over an employee’sshoulders or becoming ‘the man who came to dinner’. The idea is to facilitate cohesiveness,communication, cooperation, and improvement.Once Last Time: Management is About ServiceGood managers produce results by concentrating on two over-riding factors: 1) providing for theneeds and wants of customers, and, 2) getting the most from employees (see Chapter 30).Management is not about showing everyone who is boss. It’s not about shouting. It’s not aboutdomination. It’s not about maintaining the status quo or covering up (or ignoring) wasteful habits.Managers exist to ethically serve the needs of their customers and to streamline their business towardmaking a sale. Period.Advice from the Pros- Transforming from the role of an entrepreneur to that of a business manager involves goingfrom openness and creativity to setting perimeters and establishing control. Make sure the twofunctions complement one another rather than cancel each other out.- Every business is an accumulation of the decisions it makes. Allow paying customers (the oneswho ultimately pay your salary and bills) to be the reason for your existence by catering to theirneeds.- If your business starts to grow beyond your expectations, consider hiring an experiencedmanager. This does not mean handing over your authority to someone else. It means hiringexperience.- Don’t be a one-size-fits-all manager. Different situations require different managerialapproaches.- Admit mistakes early. Facing errors, apologizing for them, and rectifying them, does not make aperson look foolish or small. It makes him or her look like a very good manager.- If you serve your customers well your customers will serve you.119© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManagement — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business-How Small Business Owners/Managers Spend Their TimeOver an average 8-hour day, small company CEOs perform, on average, 35 activities.- Of these activities, the mean duration was 13 minutes.- 72% of the day is spent in verbal communication (25% in scheduled meetings; 25% in unscheduled meetings;3% phone (internal;) 10% phone (external;) and 9% in tours).- 28% is spent performing non-verbal work (at desk).- Half of each day is spent in meetings. Scheduled meetings (on average two per day) are significantly longer (55min on average) than unscheduled meetings, on average 22 per day (11 minutes duration on average).- Brevity of contact is characteristic of telephone calls (6 minutes on average for allphone calls).- Telephone calls and unsheduled meetings together accounted for 82% of all CEO contacts.- The majority of time (about two-thirds or 67%) is spent in contact with subordinates.- The remaining time is spent in contact with customers (11%), suppliers (11%), Independent (8%) andpeers (3%)- Communication occurred primarily in the CEOs office (84% of the time) or a subordinate’s office (9%), orsomewhere in the company (5%), or outside the organisation (2%).- CEOs of small growth-orientated businesses perform, on average, more activities per day than CEOs of largerorganisations (although the mean duration of activitiess - in minutes - generally longer for CEOs in largerorganisations).From: The Nature of Managerial Work in Small Growth-Orientated Businesses / O’Gorman & Murray & Bourke120© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIn Florida, a prospective customer once visited a small sports center where a friend of mine worked.‘I’ve just moved to the area,’ the customer explained, ‘and I’m searching for a place to play racquetball.If I like what I see, I’ll be interested in purchasing a corporate membership for my employees.’My friend was delighted at the prospect. He walked the customer over to the racquetball courtsand explained that they had just been renovated. Then he held open the door as the customer steppedinside and began inspecting the new flooring and walls.‘Who’s that man?’ the club manager demanded as she was making her rounds.‘He’s new in town,’ my friend replied, quickly shutting the door so his prospect wouldn’t hear whatwas being said. ‘He wants to look over our courts before he buys a corporate membership.The manager angrily flexed her jaws. ‘Didn’t I say, just last week, that no one is allowed on ourcourts unless they pay an hourly fee?’ Before my friend could stop her, the manager stormed onto thecourt and started shouting at the customer for not making a reservation. She then demanded that hepay a fee. My friend was so ashamed that he retreated to the parking lot to avoid hearing the rest ofher tirade. Unfortunately, just when he thought the coast was clear, he ran into the prospectivecustomer who was fleeing from the building. ‘WHO THE HELL WAS THAT WOMAN?’ the customershouted.She’s the manager,’ my friend meekly replied.‘Well, tell your manager that she can kiss my money goodbye,’ he said.Same Theme, Different StoryNot long ago, a boat manufacturing company in the northeast of Poland was in the final stages ofdeveloping its latest model. Yet try as they might, the engineers could not figure out how to install thefuel line without impeding the flow of petrol from the inboard tank to the motor when the motor wasturned to steer the boat. One afternoon, as the company’s engineers gathered around the boat todiscuss the situation again, an old janitor shuffled past pushing his broom.‘Hey Charlie,’ one of the engineers loudly said (in jest), ‘do you have any ideas as to how we can solvethis problem?’The old man approached the boat and pushed back his cap. For several seconds he gazed quietly atthe engine. ‘Get rid of the internal fuel tank,’ he replied.The engineers broke into laughter. ‘No, really,’ the old janitor said, ‘get rid of that enormous inboardtank and replace it with two big red all-purpose plastic containers. They’re available in every hardwarestore and they’ll fit easily into each corner of the boat. That way, there will be more space for fishinggear and a fuel line can run directly to the engine without being crimped when the motor is turned.’He leaned in closer. ‘Of course the greatest benefit of having replaceable fuel tanks is that the ownercan have them filled at any service station, which eliminates having to pay the exorbitant prices mostmarinas charge.’ He nodded confidently and ambled off, leaving the engineers to stare at each other instunned silence. Within days the boat was refurbished exactly the way the janitor had suggested. Sixmonths after that it became the company’s fastest selling product.Chapter 22Understanding theImportance of CustomersMusic is nothing if theaudience is deaf.Walter Lippman121© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgUnderstanding the Importance of Customers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business‘I have to ask,’ one of the engineers said to the janitor sometime later, ‘how did you know whatto do?’‘Easy,’ the janitor answered. ‘I’m a boat owner.’‘Well, I hope you’ll share more of your ideas with us in the future,’ the engineer replied. The janitor smiled wryly. ‘After you laughed at me and used my insight without a word of thanks?I wouldn’t give you another idea if my life depended on it.’Getting Back to BasicsCustomers are the most important part of every business – and although that statement maysound like a no-brainer, in too many businesses it’s not the case. So what exactly is a customer?According to successful business operators, a customer is everyone that an organization serves. Lookcarefully at this definition because it includes everyone involved in the running of a business. Think ofit this way: servicing a customer is a two-way transaction. Every customer wants something from thebusiness that he or she frequents (a product or service) and every business wants something from thatcustomer in return (money). Using this give-and-take scenario, the word ‘customer’ can therefore beclassified into two categories:- External Customers: the people that exchange money for a product or service- and -- Internal Customers: the individuals that are employed by, that use, or who rely on the work ofothers within an organization and expect money and respect in return (including employees,suppliers, contractors, shareholders, the community where the business is located, and otherstakeholders).Business 101Lesson #1: The reason why external customers are important is because the money they exchange forgoods and services pays for everything in the business(bills, rent, salaries, insurance, taxes, pensions,medical plans, equipment, and so on).Lesson #2: The reason why internal customers are important is because without them businesscannot take place. Just as important, how internal customers are treated has a direct bearing on theway external customers are treated. The responsibility of every person in every business is therefore toserve everyone else.Lip Service versus Customer ServiceExternal and internal customers are essential to every business yet the irony is that it doesn’t takefancy schemes or expenses to win them over. Usually what customers crave most is the humanelement – acknowledgement, respect, a smile, a listening ear, politeness, and honesty. Gimmicks,slogans, or the latest trendy business theory rarely amount to much when attracting or retainingcustomers.Think of your own experiences as either an internal or external customer. How many times haveyou been subjected to rudeness, glued-on grins, unhappy repetitive responses, lies, or a generaluncaring or patronizing manner? How many unanswered emails have you sent to businesses over theyears? Indeed, what is it that causes so many otherwise intelligent people to lose sight of the fact thatto make money and survive a business must focus on the needs, wants, and desires of its customers?Perhaps this rather astonishing oversight can be attributed to sensory adaptation. Sensory adaptationis the human body’s inclination to eventually ignore the stimulus of clothes, smells, eyeglasses,wristwatches, contact lenses and almost anything else we need, get used to and forget is there - untilit’s gone.122© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgHow Important are Personalized Customer Relationships?Successful entrepreneurs in ten of the 14 countries studied for this book were asked to estimate thenumber of external customers that they know on a first name basis. The answers (see FIGURE 22-1)were as follows:Figure 22-1Poland4910090807060504030201005565 65 73 75 80 8395 95AustraliaAustraliaBelgiumS. AfricaRussiaCanadaUSAUKFrancePercentage of customers the business owner knows on a first name business.What these figures show is that on average, approximately 68% of the successful entrepreneursstudied know their customers on a first name basis. It would therefore appear that establishing strongand personalized relationships with customers is a practice worth pursuing. ‘It’s very easy to start abusiness,’ says the owner of Adams Imperial Painting in Sydney, Australia, ‘but very difficult to findcustomers. So once you find them you’ll want to keep them and the only way to do that is to get toknow them.’ (see Chapter 20)Elementary Customer Mathematics (or Penny Wise and Pound Foolish)It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that if customers are not happy with the products andservice they receive they’ll go elsewhere. In addition, cultivating, delighting, and retaining customersis as important as it is never-ending because whether they’re internal or external, customers usuallyhave the option of going to another business that promises to treat them better. Consider thefollowing long-standing statistics:- A business can lose 20% (or more) of its external customers if its products are of poor quality, yet66% (or more) will be lost if the service is perceived as being bad.- It costs anywhere from five to ten times more to attract new customers than it does to retain oldones.- The average company loses half its paying customers every four years.- It costs money – lots of money - to continuously find, hire, and train employees.What is Good Customer Service?Profitable customer service begins with good ethics and includes common etiquette, showingrespect, always telling the truth, sincere attempts at quality, and giving immediate attention. In otherwords, good service starts before the customer arrives at the business and continues long afterwards.No customer should be abandoned, or be made to feel abandoned, during or after they make contactwith a business. By most accounts, this concept needs to be memorized and practiced it until itbecomes second nature. Simply put, everyone in a business is responsible for creating a positiveimage. No one is too busy to help.Understanding the Importance of Customers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business123© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgWhat Do Customers Want?To answer this question, all the business practitioners studied for this book were asked what theyappreciated most in the places where they shopped and did their business. The replies were as follows:The percentages above speak for themselves, however, if a bit more clarification is needed, readon….Three Examples of Good Customer Service1. Several years ago the Cemex cement company (in Mexico) sent a team of managers into one of thepoorest areas of the country to conduct a six-month study of poor people. Despite their poverty,people with limited incomes accounted for 40% of Cemex’s cement sales so the purpose of the studywas to determine what these folks wanted most from Cemex and to discover how this informationcould be used to increase sales. After living amongst this virtually unknown customer base andtaking the time to learn the needs of the people that comprised it, Cemex discovered how poor peopleused cement, how their purchases could best be paid for, and a host of other valuable facts. Salessubsequently grew 250% every year afterwards (Hart, 2005). The moral of the story? Pay attentionto your customers, treat them well, do what they want (including how they want it and when theywant it) and they will repay you in kind.2. In the 1990’s a company in Argentina decided that it needed a software package to help run itsfactories. Two businesses were selected to bid for the project. The first was a major software designer;the second was a small software firm. The major player immediately flew in a crack team of polishedprofessionals that astounded its audience with a first-rate slide show. Through sound effects andbrilliant graphics they showed what a world-class software company can do with a presentation.Unbeknownst to them, however, the smaller firm had sent in a half dozen of its best employees threeweeks earlier. And for three weeks these folks had sat down and worked with the managers of each ofthe Argentinean company’s factories to learn what they needed in a software package. The result?The smaller company won the contract – even though it charged more for its product. Apparently,personal attention pays off.3. Florida has over 500 airports. Most are small and host a Fixed Base Operator (FBO), which is abusiness that provides aeronautical services for small planes such as fueling, hangaring, aircraftparking, aircraft rental, maintenance, and similar services. About 75% of FBO revenues come fromfuel sales, which means that prices have to be kept low to remain competitive. Indeed, competition isso fierce that because of a similarity in fuel prices, some FBO’s are chosen by pilots simply because ofthe quality of coffee and the cookies they serve. ‘Making an overall customer impression is the onlyattention 43%choice 2% speed 3%price 6%cleanliness 6%quality 8%professionalism 32%Understanding the Importance of Customers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business124© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgUnderstanding the Importance of Customers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessway to survive in this business today,’ says Domenick Eanniello, general manager of Million AirTallahassee, ‘so we have to see ourselves as more of concierge business than a fuel caterer. We nowbook hotel rooms for customers, secure rental cars, and recommend restaurants. We’ll do anything.’Some FBO’s take orders for pizza over the radio and even let customers borrow their company vehiclefor quick journeys into town. In fact, the more laid-back and friendly an FBO is, the higher itsstanding in the flying community (DeHart, 2017).The Ten Commandments of Business SuccessOne of the more poignant lists ever developed for understanding the importance of customers hashad its authorship attributed to Mahatma Gandhi and repeated by Graham Brooks, ManagingDirector of Dowman Car and Trucks in Stockport, England. Regardless of which man developed theseprinciples they’re difficult to argue with. Think of each in relation to internal and external customers:1. Customers are the most important people in our business.2. Customers are not dependent on us – we are dependent on them.3. Customers are not to argue or match wits with.4. Customers brings us their needs – it is our job to fill those needs.5. Customers are not an interruption of work – they are the purpose of it.6. Customers do us a favor when they call – we do not do them a favor by serving them.7. Customers are part of our business – they are not outsiders.8. Customers deserve the most courteous and attentive treatment we can give them.9. Customers are the individuals who make it possible to pay our wages.10. Customers are the lifeblood of this and every other business.The Customer Paradox (or Customer Wants versus Customer Needs)Are customers always right? Of course not. Sometimes a business has to consider what customersneed rather than what they want to ensure long-term profitability. For example, American automobilemanufacturers in the 1990’s mass-produced huge, gas-guzzling suburban utility vehicles in responseto customer wants. Unfortunately, by selling a product based on little more than a fad, theycompletely ignored the inevitable (and easily foreseeable) long-term need for fuel-efficientautomobiles. The result was that entire fleets of unwanted, gas-guzzling behemoths ended up sittingin dealerships without being sold when fuel prices skyrocketed - a scenario virtually identical to one inthe 1970’s when, due to escalating oil prices and an unwillingness to produce fuel-efficient cars, thesame automobile manufacturers faced similar problems. The same situation occurred again in 2008.The message here is that in near-sighted operations that don’t consider the whole customer picture,short-term gains often lead to long-term pain.Dealing with Difficult CustomersGenerally speaking, difficult customers are people whose cost of service outweighs what theygenerate in terms of revenue. Every business has them - and whether internal or external, there areseveral ways to treat these folks before taking the irrevocable step of showing them the door. Whenpride, the need to maintain one’s dignity, or anger threaten to contaminate a customer relationship,the following suggestions may help diffuse the situation:1. Listen to the customer. Don’t just let the customer talk, listen. The customer may have a validpoint and is just not presenting it appropriately. Don’t interrupt and don’t trivialize theproblem; the complaint or insight being expressed just might save the business a lot of time andmoney. Listen and let the customer run out of steam.2. Remain calm. Speak softly and directly. Lowering your voice almost always results in the listenerdoing the same. Don’t exacerbate the situation by becoming excited, matching wits, or trying to125© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgUnderstanding the Importance of Customers — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessget the upper hand. Control the situation by controlling your emotions. It’s tough for difficultcustomers to play their game if the opposition refuses to play.3. Don’t take any remarks or behavior personally. Leave personal traits out of the situation. If youmaintain your professionalism, you will not lose your dignity – no matter how much the otherperson is carrying on.4. Attempt to solve the problem. Don’t pass the buck by sending the customer on a wild goose chase.The goal is to solve the problem quickly and directly. Remember that the customer may notknow your organization’s setup and may be frustrated because it’s not obvious where to go forhelp.5. Apologize for any inconvenience and thank the customer. Acknowledgement is a powerful tool fordisarming aggression.6. Remember that disgruntled customers tell up to five times more people about a bad product or businesscompared to the number of people they tell about good products or services. So do your best to placateirate customers.Thinking in the Long TermIn his book The Four Legs of the Table, Raymond Ackerman, chairman and developer of the highlysuccessful South African Pick n’ Pay grocery store chain, claims that all visitors to his business,including suppliers and sales representatives, are treated with personal attention and courtesy. Each isoffered a cup of tea or something to eat if it’s near a mealtime because every visitor is considered apotential customer with family and friends who are also potential customers. Ackerman says thatbecause of this policy he has lost track of the number of times he’s been approached by people who,decades earlier (in some cases as many as 30 years), were treated with such consideration that theybecame, and remained, loyal customers.The Final WordNothing is more crucial to a business than customers. The role of every business is to servecustomers what they want, where they want it, and the way they want it – while remaining evervigilant as to what they might need in the future. Put another way, fancy theories and marketingtrends are no match for good service and an attentive eye and ear when it comes to running abusiness. Entrepreneurs must never lose sight of the fact that every decision they make and everyaction they take must be customer oriented. Anything else is a complete and utter waste of time andresources. Period.Advice from the Pros- To build a better business, visualize everything through the eyes of your customers (bothinternal and external) to identify areas that need improvement.- If you don’t now what your customers want, ask them. Don’t second guess.- Treat every customer as if he or she is your best patron. What you’ll get in return isimmeasurable.- Rather than banging your head against a wall trying to figure out what customers want, allowtheir requests to guide your business by regularly asking for their wants and needs in a friendlymanner.- Always be on the lookout for new customers. If your business relies too much on one patron,particularly if that patron is another business, you may lose everything if another supplier ischosen by them or the economic environment changes and your biggest customer decides thatyour service or product is no longer a necessity.- Find new customers and keep the old for one is silver and the other gold.- Like any relationship, customer relationships must be earned before results can be obtained.126© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEver notice that in its advertising, McDonalds rarely, if ever, mentions the taste of the food itsrestaurants serve? Or that perfume ads rarely, if ever, explain what the perfume smells like? This isnormal practice in the advertising world. Most businesses don’t mention the details that make up theproducts they sell. Instead, they focus on the benefits their products provide because a benefit is whatcustomers are usually seeking.How Well Do You Know Your Product?Every product or service has three distinct levels:1. A Core Product. The actual benefit the product provides - or is seen to provide - its payingcustomers.2. The Actual Product. The unique or discerning attributes that separate one product from anotherin terms of quality, features, design, packaging, and so on.3. The Augmented Product. Additional services and benefits built around the core product such asinstallation, a warranty, delivery, credit, guarantees, or after-sales service.For the most part, successful marketing is reliant upon finding out which one of these threeproduct levels is the most appealing to customers and then adjusting policies and proceduresaccordingly to target specific customer groups (see FIGURE 23-1). The core product of McDonalds, forexample, could be convenience (which is why so many McDonalds have great locations). Or it could beuniformity, hygiene, fast service, or some other benefit a customer seeks when choosing to eat at aMcDonalds restaurant. The actual product is the burgers, fries, and foodstuff. The augmented product isthe advertised extra used to make a sale - often toys and give-aways that entice customers (or theirchildren) into the restaurant. Similarly, the core product of a cosmetics company (as stated by somecosmetic company administrators) could be hope, sex appeal, sophistication, beauty, image, orwhatever else it is that customers want in a cosmetic - which is then emphasized in a marketingcampaign. The actual product, which is wrapped around the core product, is the item itself (lipstick,rouge, make-up, eyeliner…). Augmentations can involve money-back guarantees, free samples,two-for one-deals, or any enticement that creates perceived extra value.Chapter 23The Basic Levels ofEvery ProductThe majority of (people) meet withfailure because of their lack of persistencein creating new plans to take the placeof those that fail.’Napoleon Hill127© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Basic Levels of Every Product — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFigure 23-1The Three Levels of a ProductDeliveryWarrantyPackagingFeaturesInstallationAugmented ProductStyle After-saleserviceQualityBenefitCore ProductActual ProductWhich Product Level Attracts the Most Customers?Years ago, in Nottingham, England, I watched a city centre gym owner as he struggled through themidst of a dilemma. As a small business manager with limited funds he wanted to make certain thatthe £1,800 advertisement he was placing in the local Yellow Pages directory would attract customers.Eventually he narrowed his decision down to four different styles before asking for my input. ‘Whichone do you think is best?’ he said.‘It doesn’t matter what I think,’ I replied. ‘Do you know why your customers choose this gym overthe other ones in town?’He shook his head and shrugged. ‘Convenience?’ he suggested.‘Why don’t you ask them?’ I said. Before he could answer, I spread the four ads on the top of thereception desk and asked a woman signing in to select the one she thought was best. I then askedwhat attracted her to the gym. During the following 30 minutes, I did the same with every personthat either entered or left the business. Far from being taken aback, everyone absolutely relishedbeing asked for his or her opinion. Soon a queue of people formed, each eager to offer his or her input.In the end, over 90% of my friend’s customers chose one ad as the most eye-catching. Moreimportantly, all of them mentioned price as their main reason for joining. Incredibly, my friend hadn’tmentioned the words ‘price’ or ‘value’ in any of the ads he was considering, so he took theadvertisement his customers had selected back to the Yellow Pages and had ‘best prices in town’ placedat the top of it in bold print. Since he now knows his core product is price or value, he knows that thisis what he has to keep providing. Eventually this may change (customer wants usually do), but for the128© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Basic Levels of Every Product — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessmoment he doesn’t have to bang his head against the wall wondering how to attract customers.What to Do when a Major Competitor Moves to TownBeing aware of a business’s core product, actual product, and augmented product can be aformidable weapon when used against a major competitor. But what can the owner of a cornermarket do to beat a Wal-Mart superstore opening just down the road? Or how can a small-timehamburger stand take on a giant like McDonalds? Similarly, what can a family-run photocopyingcenter do when a big Office Depot is set to open across the street? For the most part, smallercompetitors can stay in the game by knowing exactly what benefits their customers need or want andaugmenting those needs with outstanding service. More often than not, big rivals, with theirminimum-wage employees, usually can’t provide superior customer service. For example, my friend inthe Nottingham gym story above has been in business for years. During this time six other fitnessfacilities have come and gone, yet his business keeps chugging along. The reason it does becomes clearthe moment a customer walks in the door and someone on his staff greets that person as if he or shewere a long lost friend. Simply put, customers are made to feel as if they belong. What’s more, thistype of focused, personalized service doesn’t cost anything.In another example, a colleague relayed how a local photocopying center in his town managed tostay in business even though an Office Depot opened across the street. Desperate to stay in the game,the small business operator decided to provide many new services that his rival couldn’t – includingfree pick up and delivery - while eliminating the retail side of his business because he couldn’t competeagainst low prices.Yet another tale is told about a small retail shop that went head to head against a Wal-Martsuperstore. Rather than stick its tail between his legs and admit defeat, the entrepreneurial shopowner studied the buying habits if his customers and began casing his bigger rival to discover, (1) thespecific products it didn’t sell and, (2) the products it didn’t sell well. The result was that he became aspecialist in hardware and cleaning supplies - something his competitor does not want to do (andwhich it’s not qualified to do).Continuing on the same theme, consider a host of small-time hamburger stands in Central Europethat compete against the fast food giants by providing what the giants can’t – very low prices. Withhardly any overheads (these businesses are usually run by one employee in a kiosk), they attractenough customers to pull a small profit.The tactics of a number of small bookshops in England that battle everyday to compete against thelow prices and three-for-two discounts offered by the country’s major supermarkets provide anadditional example about the importance of knowledgeable customer service. Slashing prices issuicide for small bookshop owners because they can’t buy or sell in bulk. So to stay solvent manyeither widen their selections or specialize in diverse topics. Try asking a question about literature (orany specialty book subject for that matter) at a supermarket or hypermarket that sells books and thewisdom of this move becomes apparent.The owner and operator of Practical Paradigms, a software business in Sydney, Australia, says,‘Regularly talk to your customers to determine their needs instead of feeling your way along with yourown advice. By being strategic instead of tactical and you’ll use your capital more wisely.’Which Product Element Results in the Most Sales?Many experts concede that most business competition takes place at the augmented benefit level.Unfortunately, the problem for small business owners is that augmented products (e.g.: perks andfreebies) cost money and tend to become expected over time. A good example of this is reflected inthe story of a British Airways team that wanted to place a small chocolate on the trays of its passengermeals as a means to treat customers. Unfortunately, when a cost analysis was completed it wasdetermined that this gesture would cost the company over a million and a half dollars a year - so the129© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Basic Levels of Every Product — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessidea was scrapped.How, then, can a small business ever hope to compete in the product augmentation arena?The answer, again, lies in good service. For the most part, great service is a wonderful way toaugment a product without additional expense. For example, in her book Alpha Dogs: How Your SmallBusiness can be a Leader of the Pack, author Donna Fenn explains how a local butcher went up against aWal-Mart (and succeeded) by augmenting its customer service in a way few other stores can match.One way the butcher accomplishes this is to offer a variety of recipes and advice as to how to cook hisproducts combined with personalized attention and service. One night he even drove to the house ofa distraught customer at 11:30 to de-bone a leg of lamb that had to be cooked right then and there(the customer thought it had already been de-boned). In another example, the owner of a bicyclerepair business (which was also competing against a local Wal-Mart) allowed a favored customer torent a pair of bikes for free (prior to this request the owner had never considered renting hismerchandise). As it happens, the customer was a high-powered management consultant and he wasso happy with the owner’s on-the-spot decision that he gave the bike shop’s employees thousands ofdollars worth of team training workshops. In another example, a small town ice cream parlor startedinforming its customers about closing time by locking its doors and making everyone dance ‘The TimeWarp’ from The Rocky Horror Picture Show. Customers now pack into the parlor every evening just forthis experience. The bottom line is that most people don’t get this type of personalized service frombig corporations - yet it’s this type of inexpensive ‘augmentation’ that builds and instills customerloyalty.Sometimes What Customers Want is Just So SimpleIn 1997, I spent several delightful afternoons in Glasgow, Scotland listening to a man whoseconsulting work provided most of the funding for a university’s graduate school. His office, literallypiled to the ceiling with papers and reports, was located in an ancient attic on the university campus. Iimmediately fell in love with the place. This was the office of a true business practitioner. For severalhours we swapped stories about work experiences. One of his better tales concerned a local museumthat regularly lost money at its food service operation. The university had sent dozens of graduatestudents and professors to research the problem, but despite countless questionnaires and datacollection studies no firm conclusions were reached. That’s when he decided to pay the museum adirect visit. ‘Within minutes of arriving I knew exactly what the problem was,’ he explained, ‘it was thetables. The only option to customers was a series of long tables that everyone had to use together.Needless to say, most people don’t want to sit amongst strangers or groups of shrieking school kids sothey ended up bypassing this area and going somewhere else for a cup of tea.’His suggestion to the museum’s managers was to get rid of the long tables and buy smaller, moreintimate ones (which they did). Soon after, the food service court filled up and began making money.‘It all came down to providing what most people need after walking around looking at exhibits all day,’he said, ‘and that is a few minutes of rest and calm. Tea and cake is an afterthought – it’s therelaxation people want.’Once Again…Successful business operators know what their customers want, how they want it, and when theywant it – and they often have the ability to respond quickly to problems and complaints. Knowingthat a product has three distinct levels can provide a business with a new perspective regarding what isbeing sold and what customers seek. Two-way communication is key. Just as important, providingthese benefits doesn’t have to cost a lot of money. All it takes is a desire to improve, common sense,the ability to listen, and timely delivery.Advice from the Pros- There is nothing wrong with duplicating what another business sells. To attract and keep the130© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Basic Levels of Every Product — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessattention of more customers, however, find, satisfy - and advertise- the primary benefit(s) theyseek.- Customers will usually pay higher prices for specialty products or services. This can translateinto a higher profit potential for attentive business owners.- Over the course of time, even good products and services will become boring in the eyes ofcustomers. To avoid this, one or two small changes in a product, its use, or its’ advertising canwork wonders. (For suggestions on how to do this, see Increasing a Product’s Marketing Life inChapter 24)- Don’t let the everyday realities of running a business make you an introvert. Regularly seek,study, and anticipate changes in trends, technologies, and demographics.131© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContrary to popular belief, building a better mousetrap will not entice customers to beat a path toyour door. Just as importantly, good products do not sell themselves. For example, a wealthyentrepreneur in Tallahassee, Florida lamented the fact that he could not make a success of hisenterprise despite it being a top-of-the-line establishment that stood head and shoulders above itscompetitors. ‘When I built this place,’ he said, ‘I thought people would be lining up outside the door.’His words and the mournful way he stated them still send a shiver down my spine to this day. Perhapsnot surprisingly, his experience underscores the findings of a comprehensive study of small businessesacross the USA, which revealed that the greatest problem small-business managers suffer through themost is the development of sound marketing strategies (Miller, et al, 2001).A Definition of MarketingMarketing is a complex subject the breadth of which makes it difficult to define. In essence,marketing involves everything an organization does. It’s purpose however, is to bring a buyer and aseller together. Put simply, every task in a business plays its part in either encouraging or preventingthe joining of a buyer and a seller. From the product or service, to its advertising, to the way phonesare answered, to the cleanliness of the establishment, to the training of employees, to an easy-to-usewebsite, to a final sale, to asking for and responding to customer feedback, as well as everything before,in between, and after, all comprise the basis of marketing.The Marketing MixThe most popular way to explain the multiple facets of marketing is to break the subject down intodigestible sections through an alliteration that’s called the ‘Seven P’s of Marketing’ or ‘the MarketingMix’. Keep in mind that each of these components must be examined, sharpened, and directedtoward a specific type of customer in order to obtain the most from a marketing budget:- Product – or more specifically, that which provides the benefit from whatever is being sold orproduced.- Place – the location (or time) where the product is sold or distributed.- Price – the perceived value of the product.- Promotion – communicating the product to potential customers.- People – the employees and their knowledge or training that make and/or sell the product.- Physical Environment – the ambience or ‘feel’ of the physical interior where the product is sold.- Processes – the operational services and work processes that make an organization run smoothly.Basically, the ‘marketing mix’ is a divide-and-conquer aid that compartmentalizes a business intoworkable sections for the purpose of improvement as a whole. Knowing what customers wantbeforehand (through research) helps identify opportunities. These opportunities are then furtherexamined to uncover their strengths or weaknesses and the results are matched with the business’sabilities. Afterwards, the results are targeted to a segment of the market where success is envisionedbecause scattershot approaches that try to attract the attention of everybody are usually ineffective.As discussed in the previous chapter, entrepreneurs should view their marketing mix in terms ofbenefit perception (i.e.: the benefits perceived by a potential customer) because all customers weigh intheir minds the benefits they believe a product will provide before they buy the product. CustomersChapter 24The Importance of MarketingI don’t fail. I merely find and stop doingthe ten-thousand ways that don’t workThomas Edison132© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Importance of Marketing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthen act accordingly - if the business is ready and able to finalize a sale.The Promotion MixBusinesses usually get their message to customers via a promotion mix (advertising, personal selling,promotions, and public relations):1. Advertising is any paid form of a non-personal presentation and promotion of a product.The Positives- Advertising is a creative medium and its message can be repeated several times.- Advertising can be used diversely: from building up a long-term image to triggering quick sales.- Advertising can reach masses of people at a low cost per exposure.- Consumers tend to view advertised products as legitimate.- Large-scale advertising says something positive about a company’s size and success.The Negatives- Advertising is impersonal and isn’t necessarily persuasive.- Most advertising only carries a one-way conversation with its audience.- Advertising can be very costly and ineffective if the wrong medium or approach is used.2. Personal Selling is the use of oral presentation in front of one or more prospective customers forthe purpose of making a sale and building a relationship.The Positives- Personal selling involves personal interaction between two or more people so the needs andcharacteristics of a buyer can be determined quickly.- Personal selling can create strong personal relationships with customers that lead to future sales.- A buyer usually feels a greater need to listen and respond to a live person.The Negatives- It can cost a lot of money to hire, train, and maintain a good sales force.- Personal selling involves a long-term commitment (advertising can be turned on and off, but asales force takes time to hire and train).3. Sales Promotions are short-term incentives designed to encourage the purchase of a product.Examples include coupons, contests, price reductions, offers, two-for-one-deals, and freesamples.The Positives- Sales promotions often attract immediate customer attention- They offer incentives to purchase or try a product by adding value for customers- They invite and reward quick responseThe Negatives- By their very nature, sales promotions are usually short-lived and therefore they may not beeffective in building long-term commitment4. Public Relations involves the building of good relations with the public by obtaining favorablepublicity and creating a good image. It includes handling (or heading off) unfavorable rumors,stories, and events.The Positives- Public relations is very believable – PR news stories, features, and events tend to seem real andconvincing.- Public relations campaigns can reach those who avoid salespeople or advertising since the133© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Importance of Marketing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessmessage gets to an audience as ‘news’ rather than a sales pitch.The Negatives- PR can create trouble if the company begins to believe its own spin, imagines that it’suntouchable, and lowers its guard.Product Life-CycleNo matter how new or wonderful a product is, it will eventually go through phases akin tochildhood, mid-life, and old age. This is called product lifecycle. Each phase of a product’s lifecyclerequires a different marketing approach because products can ‘die’ unless their decline is counteractedby an effective marketing campaign. In a product’s introduction stage, massive advertising,promotions, and public relations are sometimes best for producing awareness. Personal selling, ifused, can be geared toward convincing traders to carry the product or in attracting the interest of largebuyer groups (clubs, professional organizations, companies, etc…). In the growth stage, advertisingand promotion tend to dominate. In the mature stage, buyers are probably aware of the productalready and may only need reminding. In the decline stage, promotions are usually prescribed,however, since marketing should ultimately be customer led, any combination of the above may proveto be suitable at any time (it all depends on what consumers respond to best). The message here is tokeep a record of what works and doesn’t work. As with many business endeavors, the best way todetermine future marketing success is to study past success (see Chapter 18).Increasing a Product’s LifeAnother method of prolonging interest in a product or service is to examine the product’s:- Uses, which involves adapting (or promoting) different ways to use a product. For example, afitness center can use its aerobic studio for karate classes or group meetings. Baking soda ismarketed for multiple purposes including cooking, cleaning, refreshing refrigerator interiors,and cleaning teeth. The most famous ‘use’ case, however, is a 1950’s Colgate toothpasteadvertising campaign, which stated that using Colgate freshens breath. Of course all toothpastesfreshen the breath of users, but no other toothpaste company had said this before in itsadvertising. As a result of highlighting this benefit, Colgate’s sales soared.- Users - or increasing a product’s appeal by targeting it to different groups. For example, a resortin Longboat Key, Florida told me that it takes the equipment from its outdoor children’sactivities and uses them in corporate teamwork promotion programs. As it happens, adults lovethe fun-and-games aspect of simple group participation programs (no matter how silly),particularly when a bit of alcohol is thrown into the mix. In addition, variations of the resort’sexercise programs are geared toward the fitness conscious (amateur athletes), the healthconscious (heart attack victims and the obese), and so on.- Usage - getting customers to use more of the product. A classic example is the adding of ‘Lather,Rinse, Repeat’ instructions on shampoo labels, which doubled the product’s usage virtuallyovernight.Don’t Go it AloneThere’s no way around it: a business cannot succeed without selling something and sellers mustsearch for buyers. Additionally, the needs and wants of buyers must be determined and good productsmust be designed, promoted, and delivered, and their image constantly improved upon. It’s anendless cycle, but there’s no need to re-invent the wheel every time. Information is widely available asto how to attract buyers, display goods to maximum effect, and finalize a sale. Much of thisinformation is available from companies that make, sell or distribute the goods or materials used byentrepreneurs. The Kraft Foods Company, for example, sends representatives to shop owners in orderto inform them what type of products sell best according to local demographics as well as how toarrange cheeses and other items so as to maximize sales. The degree of accuracy regarding this type of134© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Importance of Marketing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessinformation is astonishing. In London, England, I once watched a news team challenge threemarketers who claimed that they could determine a shopper’s gender, age, profession, and first namesimply by looking at what the shopper had purchased. The marketers were then given three piles ofgoods and told to back up their claim. Forty minutes later, they correctly identified each shopper’s sex,age, profession, and first name!The false Illusion Inherent in ‘Digital’The business world is rife with buzzwords and trends. One such example is ‘digital’, which canmean anything from the use of computer technology (laptops, smart phones, and other hardware) to afocus on social media. In April 2016, an editorial by Keith Kirby titled Digital is Dead appeared on theLinkedIn business networking website. In his editorial, Kirby stated that he attended several ‘digital’events in which the speakers and guests ‘laboured on about how the digital landscape needs a digitalstrategy, and that digital marketing is the focus of the digital native.’ It was at that point when Kirbyrealized that ‘the very word ‘digital’ is held out as if it is some magic snake oil that was just pulled intotown on the back of a covered wagon. The audience sits there, unthinking, open-mouthed andapparently amazed. It’s loose talk, it’s lazy and it’s got to stop.’  He continued, ‘Digital is a dreadfully overused word. Leaders and companies need to focus onstrategy, culture, and and so on, and the fact that they’re handled using ‘digital’ tools and processes isnot the point. We don’t bang on about ‘electric’ lights, ‘electric’ computers or ‘electric’ toasters. It’s nolonger relevant and neither is ‘digital’. What isn’t digital? Not much. ‘Digital has become a proxy forfresh systems thinking, business models and new and better ways of doing things, including somethings that weren’t even possible only a short time ago. The way we devise organizational cultures forthe benefit of all stakeholders, present brand engagement that is meaningful for customers andemployees alike and develop strategy for sustainable long term success is what it’s really all about. Let’sstop using ‘digital’ as if it’s ‘abracadabra’ and start thinking about what it is we’re trying to do, not themedium we’re doing it in.’Marketing Does Not Require Fancy Schemes or Costly ExpensesOne of the best compliments I ever received as a manager came from a friend who overheard aconversation in a shop. One of my competitors, a woman who’d been working for years in a businesssimilar to the one I was leading, had earlier greeted my arrival in town with a shrug. Six months later,I’d wrested most of her customers (and potential customers) away from her. ‘I’ve been here most ofmy life,’ she angrily told the shopkeeper, ‘yet now wherever I go I’m told that Jonathan Scott was herefirst.’Incredibly, I beat her in the marketplace with no advertising budget, no sales staff, no structuredmarketing campaigns and – prepare yourself – no telephones (at the time we weren’t accessible to aphone network). Realizing my limitations, I studied the programs we offered (an equestrian centre, asports club, a restaurant, and a golf course under construction) and determined where the most likelycustomer bases were located. I then spent a great deal of time visiting and introducing myself toschools, apartment buildings, neighborhood community centers and other places where these peopleregularly congregated. None of the other businesses in the area - and there were quite a few - had everdone this before (poster advertisements was about as far as they’d gone). Yet through repeatedpersonal contact and the setting up of programs specifically designed for each targeted group by eachgroup, I established a client base that stuck with me through thick and thin as the business grew. Yes,we eventually got telephones, hired more staff, and printed fancy brochures, but our success wassolidified through personal service and countless handshakes that cost no more than time, shoeleather, and elbow grease. The moral of the story: for the small-business owner, marketing should beconsidered less of a broadcast medium and more of a customer-oriented dialogue.135© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe Importance of Marketing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- Never underestimate the importance of marketing. No marketing means no business.- A business cannot survive by sitting and waiting for customers to show up. Throughout everyworkday (and sometimes during rest days too) customers must be actively sought and won over.- When starting a new business venture always factor in a budget for your marketing needs.Otherwise, you may spend all your capital on overheads and have nothing left for marketing.- Don’t be afraid to ask satisfied customers for referrals. Referrals are considered by manysuccessful entrepreneurs to be the most valuable way to targeting prospective customers.- Don’t decide on marketing options based on how much they cost. Instead, start by figuring outthe return you’ll get on your investment. Cost-cutting and buying cheap are not wise practiceswhen it comes to marketing.- When targeting a potential customer who is a member of a club or professional organization, tryvisiting the venue where the organization congregates to increase your chances of networking.Remember to personalize your selling approach so that it fits the group’s needs.- Small companies that set their sights on contracts with large corporations or government officesshould focus on building relationships with the people inside these entities rather than trying tocontact them directly through advertising or direct mail.- Work on image. Many corporations spend millions of dollars trying to convince consumers thatthey’re small and local. Small businesses don’t have to pretend. As a small business operator,mention your size and location as much as possible in your advertising if you’re trying to attractlocal customers.- Conversely, when making a sales pitch to large corporations or government agencies, focus onquality rather than quantity and think twice about mentioning that your business is small. Bigcompanies often view small businesses as having limited resources and limited capabilities.136© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgContrary to what many people seem to believe, strategy is not about predicting the future; rather,it’s about using the here and now to prepare for the future. This means developing an edge over rivalsto secure customers and defend against competitors. In other words, strategy is about creating acompetitive advantage.Types of StrategiesGenerally speaking, there are four types of competitive advantage strategy to choose from:1. A low-cost strategy strives to offer the lowest prices around. The intent is to attract a broadcross-section of the market. Low-cost strategies usually depend on offering few frills, having alimited selection, and extolling somewhat acceptable quality. In a business that opts for alow-cost strategy, the emphasis is on continually seeking to keep costs down, year after year, inevery aspect of the business without sacrificing quality altogether.In the marketplace, a focus must be made on trying to make a virtue out of the product’sfeatures that lead to low prices. Low prices can be an extremely valuable asset when attractingconsumers because, in part, it costs little for consumers to switch to a low-cost product line.In addition, standardized products can and do satisfy the needs of many customers, but theseadvantages can be neutralized if a competitor adopts similar low-cost methods. Similarly,concentrating solely on low costs can divert attention from other important aspects that aredependent on the ever-changing tastes of customers.For the small business owner, the down side of this strategy is that it can be very difficult tocompete against big rivals using low-costs. Big companies have the ability to benefit frombulk buying and large-scale production. Some even have enough clout to dictate purchaseprices to their suppliers. However, if a small business employs only one or two people,workspace expenses are low, and products with low-cost materials are being made or offered,cheaper expenses might make a low-cost strategy viable.2. A differentiation strategy seeks to broaden customer choice by selling different variations of asimilar product. The aim is to attract a broad cross-section of the market by offering morevariety (for example, Proctor & Gamble makes at least nine different types of laundry detergentso it can compete against the entire detergent spectrum). The idea is to provide value for buyersby building in the unique differences customers want (such as quality) in a product. The goal of abusiness that uses a differentiation strategy is to communicate its difference in credible wayswhile charging a premium price - because creating a line of diverse products usually results inhigher costs. The job of the business is therefore to stress constant improvement, invest ininnovation, and concentrate on the distinct feature(s) of each of its products offers. Doing socan build buyer loyalty, but only if the business fully understands what customers consider asvaluable. Customers must see a distinct advantage with a differentiated product or they’llprobably opt for a lower priced alternative.3. A focus or ‘niche’ strategy concentrates on a narrow part of a market rather than the wholemarket. The idea is to sell to a specific clientele whose preferences are known to be distinctlydifferent from the rest of the market. The goal of the business is to communicate the product’sChapter 25Competitive Advantage StrategyI don’t know the key to success, but the keyto failure is to try to please everyoneBill Cosby137© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCompetitive Advantage Strategy — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessunique ability to its targeted buyers. The aim is to remain totally dedicated to serving the nichebetter than competitors and to not be seen catering to other markets (which can turn off thetargeted market). The main reason for adopting a niche strategy is that big competitors don’tusually cater to small markets because they don’t see them as profitable. Yet make no mistake, ifa niche market proves to be lucrative competitors will move in.4. Invention or Innovation is a fourth strategy that entails coming up with a product or idea that isentirely new – or, thinking of a brand new use for an existing product (i.e.: putting a new twiston an old idea). By being unique a business has the ability to corner a new market if its ideacatches on. The downside is that the public tends to be skeptical of new things and may requiretime before it accepts something different. Happily, the flexibility inherent in small businessesprovides great opportunities and advantages when it comes to innovation, particularly whenmajor players ignore new trends or improved production methods. For example, over the lastseven decades, the average number of years companies have spent on the Standard & Poor indexhas decreased from 65 to ten, mostly due to the fast-paced introduction of innovations that bigcompanies can’t keep up with (Foster, 2001). Ironically, one of the reasons why big companieshave difficulty keeping up with new developments and production methods is that it’s cheaperto continue using depreciating assets (i.e.: machinery and equipment) because change is tooexpensive.Sometimes a Good Strategy is So Obvious It’s Difficult to SeeTwo hikers are walking through the woods. The first hears a noise, looks up, and sees a large, bearcharging towards him. He turns to warn his colleague only to find him sitting on a rock, putting on apair of running shoes. ‘Are you crazy?’ he shouts. ‘You can’t outrun a bear!’‘I don’t have to outrun the bear,’ the second hiker says calmly, ‘I just have to outrun you.’The point here is that doing one thing better than a competitor is sometimes all it takes to succeed.Small Business AdvantagesEven in the best of times it can be difficult for a small business to compete against bigger rivals.Chapters 23 and 24 revealed how entrepreneurs remain competitive under difficult circumstances bydeveloping good customer relationships and providing good service. Additional small-businesssurvival tactics include:- Promoting the benefits of being part of the neighborhood. Small businesses that make themselves aviable part of their community are often repaid in kind. Sponsoring school functions, cateringto clubs and social gatherings, and helping to run or sponsor local events are a few examples. Allprovide a great opportunity to promote a business as being a valuable neighbor and an integralpart of its community.- Offering superior know-how. Entrepreneurs are usually very knowledgeable about their product(s)as well as passionate and committed to their use. Try getting that type of service and dedicationfrom an employee mopping the floor at a retail chain. Due to constant cost-cutting measuresand low wages, many big corporations just can’t deliver superior service to their customers.- Providing unique or superior value. Adding a little bit extra can easily separate one business fromthe rest of its pack. This can be as simple as saying to a customer, ‘If you have any problems orneed additional help, call me and I’ll lend a helping hand.’ Alternatively, it could mean helping aclient locate a product that your business doesn’t currently offer, but would be glad to order, orhelping customers locate a company that sells what your business does not.- Being accessible. One of the more successful strategies used by fast food chains is a good locationnext to high customer traffic – both pedestrian and automobile. Small businesses that can’tafford a prime location, however, can still capitalize on this concept by bringing a service orproduct to the places where customers live or work. Examples include lunch services that deliver138© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCompetitive Advantage Strategy — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessto work sites and offices, computer repair services that do house calls, or car washing and detailservices that perform their service wherever potential customers park their cars.Which Strategy is Best?With competitive strategy, the question inevitably arises as to why a business can’t cover its bases bychoosing all available strategy options. The answer is because it’s very difficult for an organization to be allthings to all people. Imagine four different careers: writer, athlete, businessperson, and lawyer. As with anycareer choice, the literary world is full of competition. In fact, the odds of making a living as a fiction writerare worse than winning the lottery. It takes years of focused dedication, extraordinary talent (or luck)combined with some form of interim financial backing to succeed in fiction. Now imagine a person whonot only wants to become a novelist, but also is striving to be a professional athlete. Then try to visualizethis same person wanting to run a business while working to become a qualified lawyer. Absurd?Absolutely. Each career option simply takes too much time, money, energy, and effort on its own – and thesame line of thinking holds true for businesses. Yes, some companies do succeed using two or threestrategies, but they’re the exception rather than the rule. Most businesses have enough on their hands justfocusing on one strategy.The Ten Commandments of Business Strategy1. Always think in the long term.2. Never get stuck in the pack with no distinctive competitive position.3. Always invest in a clear, proper, sustainable competitive advantage.4. Avoid strategies that will succeed only in the best of circumstances.5. Show caution when pursuing a rigidly prescribed or inflexible strategy – changing conditions mayrender it obsolete.6. Never underestimate the reaction and commitment of rivals.7. Remember that attacking a competitor’s weakness is usually more profitable than attacking itsstrengths.8. Don’t cut prices without establishing a firm cost advantage over rivals.9. Don’t start something (a price war, a marketing offer, a new service, etc.) that your business can’tafford or stop.10. Beware of attacking larger stronger rivals without adequate resources. (source: Thompson andStrickland, 1993)Matching Strategy to the BusinessFor every commercial enterprise, a winning strategy is ultimately the one that best matches the style andcapabilities of the business with the wants and needs of its customers. Although this may sound obvious,too many businesses don’t get it right. The best strategy sets a direction that helps prepare for the future. Itdoes not try to predict it. Just like a sports team prepares for its matches through constant practice andrefinement, a good way for a small business to prepare for its future is to strengthen its weaknesses, hone asmany skills as possible, research the competition, build a close relationship with customers, and remainadaptive and responding to whatever comes its way. In other words, knowing your business and itscustomers will help formulate the most successful strategy (see Chapter 9).Advice from the Pros- To determine a good competitive strategy, study the market you wish to enter before entering it.- Every business should set specific goals so it can regularly measure its strategic progress (or lackthereof).- Give strategies time to work. A constantly changing strategy is as bad, or worse, than no strategy at all.139© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCompetitive Advantage Strategy — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Always state what is unique about your product or business in your advertising.- Know that competitors are not likely to welcome your new business into the marketplace. Expect tofight for your corner with a better-than-theirs marketing arsenal (i.e.: a better product, delivered bymore competent people, from a more convenient location, and/or a unique physical interior, fasterservice, and solid, personalized promotions).- Businesses that increase their efficiency, adopt self-sustaining production methods, reduce their useof virgin raw materials, lower or eliminate their waste, and decrease their pollution and energy usage,will have a distinct advantage in the coming future over those that do not (see Chapter 35).140© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPerhaps no other word in the business lexicon is as misused as ‘quality’. Most business magazinesor books are absolutely brimming with stories about how implementing quality resulted in massivesavings, enormous efficiency improvements, and/or a sea change in employee performance.Unfortunately, in almost all these cases little if anything is mentioned about how this newfoundquality was acquired – and therein lies the wrinkle because quality isn’t just about a cost-saving idea orsome spectacular work-check program. Rather, it’s an all-out, do-or-die, in-your-face, bottom line,fanatical way of thinking. But first, a little history.The father of quality is considered to be an American named W. Edwards Deming. During WWII,Deming established spectacular results in various lines of production (upwards of 200% improvement)by believing in the value of employees. He stated that most troubles faced by companies begin at thetop by people who put more of an emphasis on numbers rather than the human element and thatsuperficial gimmicks and slogans often substituted for real improvement. He also said that thecommon business workplace, riddled with fear and short-sightedness, often resists innovation andchange through counterproductive internal competition.Deming found that customer respect and involvement unleashed the kind of improvements thatmet the challenges of competition and a changing marketplace head on. Unfortunately, when the warended and the troops came home, most companies resumed their age-old practice of separatingmanagement from the workforce and dictating from the top. Meanwhile, Japan was desperate torecover from its loss. For decades it had suffered a notorious reputation for making cheap, low-qualitygoods, but when it came time to rebuild the country’s new leaders decided to do so in a different way.In 1951, Deming was invited over to explain quality-control techniques. As a result, the quality ofJapanese products has become legendary. Today, the highest award a Japanese company can win isthe ‘Deming Prize’ – an honor so prestigious it’s awarded on national television.W. Edwards Deming’s Points for Achieving Quality (abridged)Take a look at the following points Deming wrote about and practiced in the early part of the lastcentury. Just about every ‘new’ management concept taught in business schools or featured incontemporary business journals is a derivative of one or more of these concepts:- Create a business culture that regularly asks for, and accepts, innovation.- Invest heavily in training and research.- Spend revenues on maintaining current equipment as well as acquiring new items.- Work to improve every system – not just the end result of that system.- Ask for statistical evidence of processes.- Eliminate financial goals and quotas.- Learn to motivate rather than give orders.- Take the fear out of the workplace by providing an environment of constant learning.- Break down barriers between departments and place an emphasis on communication.- Eliminate superficial goals and slogans.- Retrain people (and yourself) in new skills. (Deming 1986)Chapter 26QualityQuality is the elimination of variationW.E. Deming141© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgQuality — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessCondensing the MasterDeming’s thoughts on quality have since been reduced to three important beliefs and re-christenedTotal Quality Management:1. In a business sense, quality is often defined as the ability to meet customer needs 100% of thetime. Because this is a statistical impossibility, perhaps it’s best to think about it this way:Quality is an ongoing process. In every conceivable way, quality is a race without a finish linebecause it requires a dedicated commitment to continuous improvement. Quality does nottranslate into checking for defects after a product has been made; it’s about building quality intoevery process before a product is made. Perhaps one of the loftiest goals in the quest for qualityis that of zero defects (managing an operation that runs perfectly, creating a product that neverneeds improving, and so on). Unfortunately, like the notion of achieving customer satisfaction100% of the time, obtaining zero defects is probably unobtainable. So why bother, right? Onceagain, it’s better to view zero defects as a means to an end rather than an end in itself. Forexample, the reason why we educate ourselves and read business books isn’t because we seekperfection, but rather improvement. So it is with quality. Again, it’s the unending process thatcounts.2. Quality revolves around making improvements in everything an organization does. This requires anintense focus on the customer. Keep in mind the definition of the word customer (everyone anorganization serves) and the difficulty inherent in instilling quality into a business becomesapparent. Simply put, quality involves breadth and depth in its implementation. In smallbusiness terms, this means every person in the organization must be trained and made aware ofthe need for quality (breadth). Additionally, everyone must remain actively involved in thequality process (depth). This is because the concept of quality hinges upon a shift in perspectivefrom manager to employee. Too many entrepreneurs think it’s their duty alone to determinequality work solutions in their business. The error in this line of thinking is that quality isn’t justa management issue – it’s everybody’s issue. Therefore, in the search for quality, employees (andother stakeholders) have to be trained to not only seek out problems, but to continuously findtheir solutions as well - a process that requires time, effort, dedication, and constant learning.3. Quality must be viewed as a measurable degree of excellence. Accurate measurement entails lookingat all of an organization’s systems and breaking them down into countable units (the number ofgoods produced, the number of customers served, the amount of time it takes to perform a taskor service, the costs involved in a process, the number of errors made, etc…). Only when anaccurate system of measurement has been established can a baseline be determined. Againstthis measurement improvements can be made.The Eight Dimensions of QualityAccording to D. A. Garvin (1987), competing on the basis of quality requires identifying andenhancing eight different dimensions. Knowing what customers seek in terms of these qualitydimensions can help a business gain a competitive advantage in the marketplace. Following are whatcustomers usually look for in regards to quality:1. Aesthetics: how the product looks, feels, sounds, tastes, and/or smells.2. Conformance: the degree to which the product meets established standards.3. Durability: the ruggedness or amount of use the product provides.4. Features: the ‘bells and whistles’ (augmented product) that supplement the function of theproduct or service.5. Perceived quality: the product’s reputation.6. Performance: the product or service’s main operating characteristics (i.e.: how well does it dowhat it’s supposed to do?).142© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgQuality — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business7. Reliability: the product’s ability to work when it is expected to work.8. Serviceability: the speed and courtesy of attention given to customers as well as the competenceand satisfaction that repairs provide.BenchmarkingA term frequently used in connection with measurement and quality is benchmarking. To put itbluntly, benchmarking is a process that involves copying somebody else’s good ideas. For example, alocal health club may discover that a major competitor has a big screen mounted in its cardiovascularroom so customers can watch television programs while riding exercise bikes. The local health clubthen does the same thing. Similarly, many companies routinely copy the services, operations, billingset-ups, and other systems of their rivals. Even unrelated industries can generate benchmarking ideas.Stories abound about how IBM used a Las Vegas casino’s security systems as a benchmark to reduceemployee theft. Or how a Chinese clothing manufacturer used a McDonald’s menu format to simplifyits product offerings. A colleague even told me about an airline that once reviewed an Indy 500 pitcrew to see if any ideas could be implemented to help speed up baggage control systems.For the small business, the benchmarking process usually begins by:1. Using another business’s program(s), product, or service as a reference point.2. A study is then carried out to determine what makes this program or product successful.3. An analysis is next conducted to determine if the ideas gathered from the other business will fitthe business that wants to adopt its methods.4. The challenge is to then try and implement the ideas of the successful company into theadopting business.Putting Quality into ActionAny attempt toward quality without the input of customers could very well set a business marchingoff in the wrong direction. Since quality is both a state of mind and a task-oriented concept, it can’t beachieved by one person alone. Quality is so all-encompassing it must also begin at both the top andbottom of an organization. Both internal and external customers must be involved. Here are twoplans to get started. Keep in mind that for either of these plans to succeed, the determination of azealot must be maintained, the patience of Job endured, and an extraordinary amount of persistenceexhibited:Plan A1. Gather your employees together, or take an important client out to lunch, and ask that theyhighlight areas where improvements can be made with your product or service. Make sure theproblem is business-related and is something that can be changed.2. Don’t be defensive or enter a state of denial. Become enthusiastic about finding a solution tothe problem and search for and discuss quick ways to resolve it.3. Set a target and implement the solution.4. When the solution has been implemented, praise everyone involved.5. Find another problem and repeat the above steps.Plan B1. Formulate a weekly quality meeting comprised of internal or external customers whose task isto make improvements.2. Create an atmosphere where customers feel unafraid to voice their opinions and comments.3. Provide your customers with an incentive to perform.4. Establish a few basic ground rules outlining what you want to achieve.143© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgQuality — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business5. Give your team time to gather confidence.6. Keep it going.Again, it is of paramount importance that quality involves every aspect of a business. Nothingshould be overlooked because everything an organization does is inter-linked and requires constantattention, upkeep and care. Even duties as seemingly trivial as cleaning an organization’s washroomsin some way reflects on the standards set in the business, and that ultimately sends a message as tothe respect given to both internal and external customers. A long time ago, this concept was aptlyillustrated in a nursery rhyme:For want of a nail, the horseshoe was lostFor want of the shoe, the horse was lostFor want of the horse, the rider was lostFor want of the rider, the battle was lostFor want of the battle, the kingdom was lostAnd all for the want of a nail.The Mother of All BattlesQuality is more than just a term – it’s a commitment to undertake unending work. As an ongoingcrusade it’s also a long-term goal and long-term term success should always be given precedence overshort-term gains. To establish quality, time must be devoted to making products or services thatwork right the first time. Staff and personal training and development must never be sacrificed.Reliability should always take priority over speed. For each and every employee the pursuit of qualitymust become an unassailable state of mind, or the kingdom will be lost.Advice from the Pros- Regularly review the strengths and weaknesses of your company through the unbiased eyes of asecond or third party. This can be as easy as installing a suggestion box in your business ortaking the time to actually read your emails (especially those from customers).- When it comes to customer wants and needs, never assume, always ask.- Don’t take criticism personally. Invest your business’s passion and efforts in satisfying customerdemands rather than in denials and/or justifications.- Don’t cut corners with quality. You’ll pay dearly for it later.- Always strive to have at least one aspect of your business be of higher quality than yourcompetitors.144© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAccording to legend, an enthusiastic patron of the arts once approached Pablo Picasso in arestaurant. ‘Please draw me something,’ she insisted, ‘I’ll pay you whatever you want.’Eager to continue his meal in peace, the artist drew a few lines on a napkin and handed it over.‘That will be ten thousand dollars,’ he said.‘Ten thousand dollars!’ the woman shrieked. ‘But it only took you twenty seconds to produce this!’‘No,’ Picasso replied, ‘forty years and twenty seconds.’In his own way, what Picasso was trying to explain to his admirer is that there is a differencebetween price and value. A price is the amount of money charged for a product or service thatconsumers exchange for the benefit of acquiring a product. Value is a perception and may involvedemand or additional costs that are not readily apparent (such as labor, experience, or skill; or, forpaying customers, the amount of money or time involved in switching over to another product).Historically, prices for most products were usually established through barter or negotiation. Pricestherefore varied depending on the buyer’s skills. In the early part of the last century, however, F.W.Woolworth changed this practice by adopting a strictly one-price rule in all his stores – a policy thatsoon spread.Facts about Pricing- Price is the only component of the marketing mix (page 131) that produces revenue. All othersrepresent costs.- Price is the most flexible element of the marketing mix. Unlike the other marketing mixelements, a price can be changed quickly.- Pricing is often the most significant factor affecting buyer choice, but it’s a double-edged sword.If a price is too high, buyers may turn away. If it’s too low, they may sense something is wrongand also turn away.- Pricing is not often handled well. For example, if a price is cut by 10%, it may result in 50% ofprofits being lost.Common Mistakes in Pricing- Prices that are too cost-oriented (e.g.: customer value is not contemplated).- Prices that do not reflect the current market (as above, there could be high demand or a lack ofdemand).- Not taking into account the other marketing mix components (again, the perception customershave of value may not be contemplated – or perhaps it’s misjudged).- Not varying prices according to different products, different market segments, or promotions.- Slashing prices in the assumption that doing so will raise sales (the problem could be ineffectivemarketing, low perceived quality, or any number of other factors which will not be solved bychanging prices).- Raising prices to increase revenues (again, the problem may lie somewhere else – and if it does, itwon’t be solved by raising prices).Chapter 27PricingPrice is what you pay,value is what you get.Anonymous145© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPricing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessStarting the Pricing ProcessBefore the pricing process begins, it’s necessary to consider what it is you want pricing to do foryour business. The obvious answer is generate revenue, but how will this be achieved? By being morecompetitive? By attracting a specific clientele? By getting more customers to try a product? Howabout a combination of one or more of these objectives? If your business is serious about making themost of its prices, then it’s worth the time and effort to think about these questions, write themdown, discuss them with colleagues, and think them over. The results can be used as a rough draft or atemplate for helping to set a good price.Internal and External Factors that Affect PricingConsider the following when establishing a price for a product or service:1. Internal Factors (situations or determinants inside the company). These include:A. Marketing Objectives, which are determined by the chosen target market and its position in theoverall market. Knowing what targeted customers expect in terms of price can help determine anumerical value. For example:- Is the luxury market being sought?- Is the economy market being sought?- Is a survival strategy envisioned (selling below cost)?- Will product prices be based on demand?- Do research and development costs need to be covered?B. The Marketing Mix Strategy coordinates a product along with its production, distribution, andpromotion to form a consistent and effective marketing program. Examples include:- Target Costing – Starts with the price the business wants to charge for a product, then worksbackwards (changing production processes, simplifying systems, working with outside suppliersand distributors, and deciding on a marketing campaign based on what the price of the productshould be). Many small business operators do this when chasing clients. First they determinewhat the costs have to be to achieve the target price (based on customer demand), then theychange their internal systems to meet the costs that will get them there.- Value Pricing is when the best strategy is not to charge the lowest price, but to make the productdifferent (or seem to be different) so that it’s worth a higher price.C. Costs are what the product actually costs to produce (and market), which must be covered in theprice. Examples include:- Cost-Plus Pricing occurs when a standard mark-up is added after determining the fixed andvariable costs of a product. This type of pricing is sometimes seen in construction companies orwith lawyers, accountants and other professionals who figure their costs then add a 20-percentmark-up (or whatever percentage is deemed appropriate).2. External Factors are situations or determinants outside the company.A. The Market and Demand. For example:- Pure competition – basing prices on ‘the going price’ (everybody else is doing it so we will as well)- Oligopolistic competition – having few sellers that are highly sensitive to each other’s pricingstrategies (i.e.: if one company changes its prices so will the others)- Monopoly pricing – by being a sole supplier, the producer can price as he or she sees fitB. Consumer Perceptions or basing prices on what customers think constitutes value (Note: Thisrequires a firm understanding of consumer behavior).C. Price-Demand Relationship involves setting prices according to market demand. The higher the146© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPricing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessdemand, the higher the price. The lower the demand the lower the price.D. Competitor’s Costs, Prices, and Offers include basing prices on the overall selling environment.Pricing in ActionThe following list (which uses the leisure industry as a backdrop) shows the many different types ofpricing strategies available to entrepreneurs along with examples that highlight their application.Pricing Type Definition ExampleBreakdown Prices are broken down A $1,000 gym membershipinto palatable segments. is sold in installments(4 payments of $250 oronly $2.75 per day).Seasonal The price is adjusted to Prices rise during peakreflect periods of time. seasons or are reducedduring slow times.Pay One Price (self-explanatory) In amusement parks - or either pay one fee and Pay as You Go ride all the rides, or payfor each ride separately.Bundling Services sold as a Activities sold in lots(Unbundling) package deal or split such as 10 aerobics classesup and sold separately. or 5 tennis lessons.Unbundling would sellthese as single units.Exclusivity Paying for ‘snob appeal’ Paying premium prices fortrendiness or what isperceived as social esteem.Discount Low prices Customers buy because the price is low.Captive Locking in customers A classic example:by initially selling cheap computer printers thatthen charging a premium are cheap, but thefor necessary components. ink cartridges are very expensive.Psychological Prices do not approach Charging $99 instead ofwhat is perceived as $100. Listing membertoo much. prices next to non-member’s.147© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPricing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessPromotional Not paying a set price. Having constant salesor always bettering whatthe competition charges.Value Added Adding ‘freebies’ or Two-for-one deals.other incentives without Baker’s dozen (13 for the price of 12).charging for them.Trials Easing the perceived Offering the first tennisrisk by encouraging lesson free. 90-day trial periodsparticipation before or, giving a money backclosing the sale. guarantee.Hidden Costs Not displaying extra Not including tips, taxes,costs needed to complete labor, parts, batteries…the product or service.Fixed to One price begins the Paying to get into the disco,Variable process, the next price(s) then separately for each drink.is (are) determined by use.Differential Charging customers Members pay one price,differently. non-members pay another.Creative Variable Setting prices according Altering the price dependingto demand, but in an on certain variables (sellingimaginative way. rope by the meter)Price Performance Price determined by Museums or exhibitsvalue perception. asking guests to leavea donation instead ofcharging an entrance fee.Differing Segments Same product/service Children, senior citizens,sold at different prices. groups, adults, etc, eachpay a different price.Product Line Prices arranged to get Expensive goods arecustomers to focus on displayed next to lower‘the deal’.priced goods.Summing Up PricingWhen setting prices, don’t sell your business short. According to seasoned practitioners, mostbusinesses should think about how high they can reasonably go with their prices rather than how low– while always considering what customers will perceive as fair and ethical. The most commonmistake entrepreneurs (particularly service providers) make when it comes to setting prices is notcharging for accumulated knowledge, time, and experience (see page 54 and the section titled HighPrices versus Low Prices in Chapter 9, as well as Reason #10 in Chapter 10). Never stop analyzing whyand how your prices are established and always be open to exploring and considering new ways toachieve pricing satisfaction.148© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPricing — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvice from the Pros- Price your products correctly the first time. It might be difficult to raise them later.- Factor your time and skills into your prices. Don’t undercharge for your time and expertise.- Always remain aware of your competitor’s prices, sales, and promotions.- Try to keep your prices (and therefore your profits) as high as possible by offering additional orunique services your competitors can’t, don’t, or won’t provide.- Remain vigilant when it comes to the prices you pay for supplies, materials, and merchandise.Don’t be tempted to buy cheap. As the saying goes, those that buy cheap, usually buy twice.149© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThere’s a big difference between marketing and sales. Marketing brings a buyer and a sellertogether. A sale is the point where a prospective customer hands over money in exchange for aproduct or service.Without question, selling is the ultimate objective of every business and arguably the mostimportant aspect of business success because everything hinges upon it.Strangely, however, despite the fact that sales can often make or break a business, it’s difficult, ifnot impossible, to find a university or a business school that offers a course in selling as part of itscurriculum. Few academics, it seems, will dirty themselves with what they consider to be a commonvocation that is not worthy of study. This is a shame because there’s nothing plebeian or disgracefulabout selling. The ability to sell forms one of the cornerstones of business and like any businessprocess it should be studied, practiced, and constantly improved upon.The Art and Science of SellingBusiness schools may not be interested in what successful entrepreneurs consider to be the mostimportant part of commercial enterprise, but that doesn’t mean that there’s no shortage of coursesand books ready and willing to fill the academic void. Be that as it may, sales training on its owncannot work miracles because the art of selling is based largely on the aptitude and ability to connectwith a customer. Stated differently, an introverted, detail-oriented, technical nerd - or a hyperactive,in-your-face, blabbermouth - may never be able to transform themselves into a focused salesperson.This is because selling often requires solid investigative work: tracking down potential customers,giving persuasive fact-based presentations that target customer needs, and discreetly closing a sale.Put another way, any idiot can take a sales order, but those who can squeeze money out of any salesprospect are in a league of their own.Selling 101: Understanding Customer MotivationThey key to successful selling is in understanding customers and their motivation. Two factors areinvolved. The first is moving toward a goal or reward. The second is moving away from fear or loss. Ifyou can work out which one of these motivates your customers (or can figure out how both of themcan), you’re well on your way to making a sale (Parinello, 2003). Put another way, successful sellinginvolves moving from a selfish ‘me, me, me’ point of view, to a self-less ‘customer, customer, customerperspective.Doing Your Homework (or, Knowing Who Your Customers Are)To a competent salesperson, a customer is someone who needs a product and has the financialresources to buy it. Generally speaking, customers fit into two categories.- Potential customers are the individuals that walk into a business because of its location or thosewho respond to an ad or promotion. Potential customers are therefore those who use, show, orhave shown, an interest in the type of product a business sells.- Prospective customers are the unnamed and as yet unseen individuals or groups that roughly matchthe description of a potential customer. Prospective customers tend to live or congregate insimilar areas and can therefore be tracked down by placing ads in the newspapers or magazinesChapter 28SellingA successful person is one who canlay a firm foundation with the bricksthat others throw at him.David Brink150© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSelling — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthey read (or on the radio and television programs they listen to or watch), by going through alocal phone book (like-minded people tend to live in the same area), by talking with potentialcustomers, by reviewing mailing lists, by conducting demographic research, and so on.Successful selling begins with updated research that investigates and records the whereabouts ofprospective and potential customers. This makes it easier to target the people most likely to buy aproduct rather than wasting time, energy, and money, on those who will not.What Every Good Salesperson LearnsBy improving one’s selling abilities it’s also possible to improve one’s marketing efforts, establishconnections with customers, and acquire a better understanding of the marketplace. This is becauseselling is a learning process that teaches entrepreneurs (and other sales-oriented individuals):- about their products. Good salespeople learn their products inside and out. They learn thestrengths, weaknesses, and differences as well as the features, advantages, and benefits. Equallyas important, they learn how to match these qualities to a customer’s needs.- how to listen. Through personal interaction a good salesperson can find out what his or hercustomers need, how they need it, when they need it, and if anything else is needed to go alongwith it.- what customers expect. Hard-selling (placing pressure on customers to buy quickly) can repulsecustomers while the soft-sell approach (giving customers time to make up their minds) canresult in lost sales. A good salesperson will learn what his or her customers respond to and willuse that information to predict what will work with future customers.- the capabilities of the business. Effective businesses constantly improve their policies andcapabilities to suit customer needs. As a result, they never promise what they can’t provide.- the art of persuasion. A winning salesperson masters the skills of communication (accuracy,brevity, and clarity) and knows how to obtain feedback by asking questions that begin with why,when, how, or where (try answering ‘yes’ or a ‘no’ to them).- presentation skills. A good salesperson practices how to connect with an audience in 30-secondsor less. Thirty-seconds is usually enough time to build trust, get a customer involved, erase afew doubts the customer has, and prove any claims being made.- how to avoid wasting time. For maximum cost effectiveness an experienced salesperson doesn’tspend time with people who don’t have the ability or authority to buy a product. Although thesepeople may be valuable in providing information about the person who can, sales efforts are bestspent on the person who has buying power rather than his or her underlings.- how to handle objections. Learning to deal with objections is crucial. Is the customer stalling or ishe or she simply unable to make the next move? Does the customer have a genuine need for theproduct? Does the customer have enough money to buy the product? A well-trainedsalesperson will find out.Two Basic Sales Approaches‘If you can fake sincerity,’ said comedian George Burns, ‘you’ll make it anywhere.’ For the mostpart, however, people can’t fake sincerity and their pathetic attempts to do so can often be spotted amile away. To avoid falling into the insincerity trap, a good salesperson makes certain that each andevery customer feels as if he or she is the only and best customer in the world. Following are two waysthis can be achieved:1. Relationship building involves establishing a rapport between a seller and a buyer (which takestime). For example, some customers hate socializing and only wish to talk business. Othersneed to be reassured that they’re talking to a sympathetic individual, which means that they maynot want to ‘talk shop’ for quite some time. Good salespeople know how to measure up to each151© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSelling — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesscustomer type by asking themselves: Is the customer amiable, family-oriented, and affected bywarmth, safety and security factors – or an analytical type impressed by facts and figures? Doesthe customer have a busy schedule and a short attention span – or is he or she easily impressedwith the names of other clients that use our products? The bottom line is that customers onlybuy from people they understand and connect with - so do some research.2. Targeting customer problems involves identifying specific problems a customer faces and showinghow a product will uniquely resolve it. Some companies have increased their revenues up to1,000% using this method. For example, if a business manufactures first aid kits for factories,rather than bragging about their low cost, the materials they contain, or the design awardsthey’ve won, find out what injuries have been suffered in the past by the employees of thefactory being targeting and use this information in the sales pitch. In a factory where employeesare prone to burns this could be accomplished by saying, ‘studies show that by using thematerials in our first aid kits, burn scars are reduced by 63% and pain is reduced by 80%.Furthermore, by having our kits on your premises, your insurance premiums can be lowered byup to 14% and your company will save an additional $2,000 per year because of the currentdiscount we’re offering.’This personalized approach helps achieve three objectives. (1) It gets a customer emotionallyconnected to the product. (2) It targets real problems with real solutions, and, (3) it shows thecustomer what is at risk by not using the product. Put more succinctly, in one fell swoop it shows aclient how he or she can (a) move closer toward a goal or reward and (b) move away from fear or loss(Parinello, 2003).Sales CallsA sales call is a face to face meeting with a potential customer and as such must be planned inadvance. This means researching, writing down, and studying what needs to be done before a firstmove is made.Once the background work has been completed (i.e.: researching the targeted customer and his orher business), the next step of a sales call is to get on the phone and pay homage to the customer’s‘gatekeeper’. A gatekeeper is a secretary or assistant who answers the phone and/or makesappointments in the office of the person to whom a business wishes to sell. The task of selling will bemade much easier if the gatekeeper is treated well.When the perspective customer gets on the phone, most professionals suggest that your focusshould be on making an appointment – not a sale. This shows respect for the client’s time. It alsoavoids making the all-too-common mistake of pouring on the goods straight away. For an effectivesale to take place a customer’s attention must be undivided. That’s why a face to face meeting is theobjective of the phone call. State your name, the name of your business, and the benefit of what isbeing offered. Then say the following, ‘I’d like to make an appointment to meet with you. Fifteenminutes should do it. Will tomorrow morning at ten o’clock be okay?’ Say this in a relaxed andinformal manner. Be ready to suggest arranging an alternative meeting if the customer is not availableduring the time offered.The Do’s of Making a Sales CallAccording to entrepreneur and author Jim Green (2002), an effective sales call should not lastlonger than 15 minutes. Green goes on to say that every meeting should begin by thanking theprospect for his or her time followed by a brief introduction of yourself and the business yourepresent. Immediately thereafter, your product and its benefits should be described in about thirtyseconds. The rest of your time should be spent determining the needs of the customer (if this hasn’tbeen done in advance) and matching them to your product. A product sample, some photographs, ora brochure should be produced after the 30-second presentation. If these are introduced beforehandthe customer’s attention will be diverted from the sales pitch. Following are a few more pointers:152© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSelling — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business1. Turn up for the appointment five minutes early (but not any earlier). As Woody Allen once said,‘Eighty percent of success is showing up on time’.2. Have a positive outlook and attitude. What you believe before the sales meeting will probablydetermine how it ends.3. Stay focused on the objectives of the meeting. Selling approaches should be practiced again andagain until they can be delivered in a relaxed and casual manner that stay on track.4. Listen to the customer. Ask customers to describe their business (they’ll probably be very flatteredand eager to do so) then sit back and learn about their needs.5. Be prepared for a little give and take. Don’t lose out on a sale because your sales pitch has beenchiseled in stone. Find a way to connect the benefits of the product being offered (includingpayment and delivery) with the needs of the customer.6. Ask for the sale. At the end of the presentation it’s unlikely that the customer will jump up andsay, ‘Sounds great! I’ll buy two-hundred!’ If a ‘yes’ response is not forthcoming, respond to anyobjections and gently ask for the sale again.7. Always remember that an unclosed sale is not a lost sale. After the meeting, write down whathappened, what was discussed, and any objections that the customer made. With a little workthis can be refashioned into a future sale.8. Learn to handle rejection with dignity. Particularly at the beginning of one’s selling career, mostsalespeople lose more times than they win. Rejection should not be taken personally. Move on.9. Learn from any mistakes. Often the most powerful lessons in life come from failure.10. Keep sales records up to date. Doing so will improve success rates and may lead to further sales.The Don’ts of Making a Sales Call1. Never show up at a sales meeting reeking of garlic, alcohol, perspiration, etc. Doing so is highlyunprofessional.2. Don’t talk too much. This can be seen as threatening, unsettling, or just plain rude or tedious to apotential customer.3. Don’t be ignorant about your product range. Always be prepared to answer questions.4. Don’t be overconfident. Unchecked eagerness is not an asset when it comes to making a sale.5. Don’t skim over the benefits of a product by ‘going for the kill’ to quickly. Be measured and meticulousin your approach by showing an interest in the customer.6. Don’t promise something that can’t be delivered. All future sales with the customer will be lost (salesto other customers will also be lost if word of your dishonesty spreads).7. Don’t argue with the customer. Salespeople who argue with their customer lose sales.8. Don’t knock the competition. Let the customer do that.9. Don’t forget to ask for the sale. At the end of every presentation, ask for the sale (see Chapter 29).10. Don’t talk yourself out of the sale. Once the sale has been finalized, thank the customer, hand himor her your business card or brochure, and politely leave.Advice from the Pros- Every single one of a business’s front-line employees should be taught how to sell. Ignoring thefundamentals of selling is akin to turning away countless sales opportunities every day.- Ensure your front-line employees fully know about, and believe in, the products you are selling.For example, if your business sells mobile phones, make sure your employees use your mobilephones. If you operate a restaurant, make sure your employees have sampled your menu items.If you own a fitness club, make sure your employees train on your equipment. Few things turnoff customers faster than that millisecond pause between asking an employee if he or she uses153© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSelling — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthe product and the wide-eyed ‘yes’ lie that the employee eventually stammers out.- You and your employees are a direct reflection of your business. No matter how good a productis, if your salespeople radiate a cluttered business, a cluttered wardrobe, and a cluttered life,customers will be turned off by what they see as rampant disorganization and sloppiness.- Remember that selling, like any human endeavor, often takes practice and time. Don’t beimpatient and don’t give up. Some people take years to develop a great sales technique.- Don’t ‘cost-cut’ the human side of your business. Distancing yourself from customers onlydiminishes the chances of making a sale.- Be open to advice and feedback. Feedback and criticism are the only ways a sales technique canimprove.- Read as much as you can about selling. Discuss the subject with others. Visit sales websitesand/or attend sales-training workshops and meetings. You (and your employees) can never getenough sales training.- If the customer says no, don’t see this rejection or failure as an insurmountable obstacle. Learnfrom your mistakes, do some more homework, put together a different approach, and contactthe customer again (after sufficient time has elapsed) with an improved performance.154© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgImagine that you’re on a sales call and are trying to make a sale. You’ve done your research, found apotential customer, made an appointment, showed up on time, and made a strong presentation… nowwhat?The answer to this question is to sit back and listen to what your customer has to say. One of fourthings will happen. (1) The customer will have an objection. (2) The customer will want to hear more(and will subsequently show some positive buying signs). (3) The customer will say ‘no’, or, (4) thecustomer will say ‘yes’. Here’s what should be done in each situation:1. When the Customer Has an ObjectionVery rarely will a customer give an abrupt ‘no’ to a sales presentation. Usually an objection will begiven instead. The golden rule with objections is to shut up and listen to them. Don’t interrupt with amachine-gunned, point-by-point rebuttal. Doing so will be seen as an eagerness to disprove ordiscredit the customer, which is very off-putting. Instead, place yourself in the customer’s shoes. Byunderstanding what the objection (or fear) is it can usually be dealt with. Chances are anothercustomer has had a similar objection. If so, you should know how to deal with it. If not, you’ll have tothink quickly. Following are a few ways sales genius Tony Parinello suggests preparing for salesobjections:- If the customer says, ‘Sorry, but we’ve decided to go with another company’ or, ‘We’ve beendealing with Company X for years now and we want to stay loyal.’You should say, ‘Okay, but before I go, would you like to know how much your commitment toCompany X is costing you?’ Then proceed to state the facts without bad-mouthing thecompetition.- If the customer says, ‘I don’t like (the inherent weakness) of your product.’You should say, ‘That’s actually one of our strengths.’ The idea is to then turn the weakness intoa strength. For example, if you’re selling home burglar alarm systems and the customerbelieves that they’re too complicated and take too long to turn off, a good rebuttal is to say,‘We designed them like this because if they take longer for you to turn off, they’ll also take along time for a burglar to turn off.’- If the customer says, ‘Your product costs too much.’You should say, ‘How much lower would our price have to be so you can meet your profitmargins?’ This allows you to investigate the needs of the customer and puts you in a positionto relay the strengths, added value, or uniqueness of your product. Be careful, however, anddon’t waste time with people who can’t afford the product or don’t want to pay for quality.- If the customer says, ‘Thanks. I’ll phone you next month and let you know what our decision is.’You should say, ‘Okay, but before I go, what exactly do you want to hear or see during that timethat will allow us to better meet your needs?’ or, ‘I’ve got an idea. How would you like to meetanother customer of mine and talk to him or her about the product over lunch?’ The pointhere is to avoid the brush-off (which is what the customer is doing) and provide additionaloptions without obediently skulking out the door.- If the customer says, ‘No way. Your product (or business) has a bad reputation.’Chapter 29Closing the SaleDefeat never comes to any (person)until (he or she) admits itJosephus Daniels155© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgClosing the Sale — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessYou should say, ‘Sorry to hear that. Tell me, if one of your salespeople heard that commentfrom one of your customers, how would you ask them to handle it?’ Or sit back and let thecustomer dump on you. Take notes and take the heat. When he or she has finished speaking,articulate exactly what your company has done to correct the problems the customer hasraised. (Parinello, 2004)2. When the Customer Displays ‘Buying Signals’Almost every sales manual contains a list of signs that highlights what customers do or say whenthey’re ready to buy. Do these signals guarantee that a sale is guaranteed? Unfortunately, no. Whatthey do reflect, however, is that the customer is interested. Traditionally, a buying signal is made whena customer:- makes positive noises (i.e.: ‘Really?’ ‘Wow!’ ‘Hmm-hmm.’ ‘Ooh!’),- asks for a sample,- asks for a reference from another customer,- asks detailed questions about the product or service (i.e.: ‘When is the earliest it can bedelivered?’ etc…),- mentions a bad experience with another company,- repeats a question that has already been answered,- comments (good or bad) about the price of the product,- asks ‘test’ questions (i.e.: ‘What if I don’t like it? Can I bring it back? What if I can only pay bycredit card?’ and so on…), or,- asks for your professional opinion.Remember, while it may be true that a customer is ‘playing ball’ by using such phrases, he or shemay still not be ready to sign on the dotted line. You must therefore keep the process moving bylistening to what the customer is saying and how it’s being said. Then address any remainingobjections.3. When the Customer Says No.Most unsuccessful sales attempts are a result of poor planning. Once again, before meeting with apotential client, do your homework:- What are the needs of the customer and the needs of his or her company? (i.e.: What are his or herpast sales habits? How was the name of the customer obtained? Where is he or she located?Who are his or her current suppliers and customers?…) Knowing this information can helpcustomize your presentation.- What type of personality does the potential customer have? Do family and friends come first? Doeshe or she need to feel important? Is he or she impressed with facts and figures? Knowing theanswers to these questions will help you put together a presentation that fits your customer’spersonality. For example, if the customer is family oriented, stress the fact that your companywill remain loyal through thick and thin.- Is the customer moving toward a goal or reward – or away from a fear or loss? Your sales presentationshould reveal how one or both can be accomplished.- Did you get the customer emotionally involved in the product? Did you prove how much money thecustomer or his or her company will save - or demonstrate the specific value that will beobtained? Did you discover a problem the customer was facing (or could face) and show howyour product is the best solution? Was a free sample provided?- Remember that an unsuccessful sale is not lost forever. When a ‘no’ is given and nothing further canbe obtained (or if you’re wearing out your welcome), get up, shake hands with the customer,present your business card and leave. The information collected from the meeting can beanalyzed over the coming weeks and months. Stay in touch with the customer (without being a156© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgClosing the Sale — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesspain in the neck) and try again later.4. When the Customer Says YesCongratulations. Now thank the customer, let him or her know how they can get in touch withyou, and leave. Don’t oversell. Don’t accept an invitation for a cup of coffee. Don’t hang around.Don’t ask what the customer thought of the big sports game last weekend. Don’t do anything that willjeopardize in an instant what took a lot of hard work to obtain. Just thank the customer and politelyleave.Issues that Should be Pondered Toward the Close of a Sale- Don’t appear too keen or nervous.- Don’t ignore the strong points or nuances of your presentation and/or product.- Don’t talk too much (listen to the customer).- Don’t ignore any buying signals.- Don’t push it.- Stay calm and relaxed.Closing the SaleAccording to many successful entrepreneurs, the best way to close a sale is to simply ask for it – andthe best way to do that is by stating a question that cannot be answered with a ‘yes’ or a ‘no’. Ideally,the question should be tailored to imply that the customer has already reached an agreement.Suggestions include:- ‘When would you like to get started?’- ‘What type of payment would you like to make?’- ‘Is this purchase being made for you or is it a gift for someone else?’- ‘Would you like to put a 20% down payment on this purchase or is 15% easier?’- ‘We can ship this order today. Does that suit your needs?’If the customer is still not quite there, but continues to show interest, another approach is to throwback the customer’s questions so that he or she is forced to answer back in a positive way. Forexample, if the customer asks, ‘Does this come in any other colors?’ the response can be, ‘Would youlike it in another color?’ or ‘What color would you like it in?’The point is to keep momentum moving toward the sale.What To Do When the Customer BalksLet’s assume the customer is still undecided. Your job is to find out why. Statistics show thatroughly 85% of customers that walk out of a sales negotiation never return. It’s therefore prudent tohang on to a prospect for as long as possible and…- determine the underlying reason for the hesitation and address it. Respond to and alleviate anyuncertainties and fears by using positive comments to make the customer feel better aboutmaking the commitment.- Remind the customer why he or she was interested in the product (which should have beendiscovered earlier) and reinforce these interests.- Some professionals suggest guiding the customer to the end of the sale by asking close-endedquestions that demand a ‘yes’ answer and get the customer in the habit of saying yes.- Don’t raise the hackles of the customer by issuing threats, dares, or insults. Examples include,‘Well, if you want to pay a higher price for a worse product go right ahead,’ or ‘Fine, talk to ourcompetitors. You’ll be back.’ Or ‘If you say no today, we won’t make this offer again.’Remember, your objective is to sell a product – not force the customer to dance to a tune.157© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgClosing the Sale — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- If all else seems to be failing, consider offering a trial run or a free sample. This develops aphysical and emotional link between the customer, your business, and your product. Obtain thecustomer’s contact information when this offer is made. That way a follow up call can be made.- Ask for the sale again. If you can’t openly ask for a sale in a straightforward manner you may besuffering from a confidence problem. Do you believe in your product or not?Advice from the Pros- Always point out the extra benefits the customer will receive by doing business with you ratherthan just purchasing the product.- Don’t let a former bad experience with a customer affect your attitude. If your last customerturned you down, shrug off the disappointment, learn from what happened, and press on.- Similarly, if your last sale was a success, don’t come across in your next sales encounter asarrogant and cocky. Learn what was done correctly and stay grounded. Every sales encountershould be treated as if the customer you’re speaking with is your first and best.158© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgMotivating Employees: Four Separate TheoriesThe Academy of Management Journal once conducted a survey that sought to determine the mostinfluential theories in all of management. The second highest honor was awarded to Abraham Maslowand his ‘Hierarchy of Needs’ motivational pyramid (see FIGURE 30-1). Maslow’s pyramid is based ontwo underlying principles. When seeking motivation: 1) everyone starts at the bottom and attemptsto move up when they see that the need immediately above is not being fulfilled, and, 2) a needcannot be activated until the one below it has been met. The following illustration shows Maslow’spyramid in diagram form.Figure 30-1 Maslow’s PyramidEsteem the need for respect, prestige andrecognitionthe need for a sense of belonging SocialSafety the need for protection and stability(i.e.: job security)Physiologicalthe need for biological maintenance– food, water, health (or in businessterms: money)Self Actualizationthe need for self-fulfillment, growth,displaying creativity and fully usingabilitiesAs with many groundbreaking ideas, Maslow’s theory continues to be debated to this day. Here,however, it’s not important to either agree or disagree with it. The idea is to understand that all peoplehave needs and seek to fill those needs – and smart managers, when searching for ways to keep theirstaff motivated should find out what those needs are (note that the top four motivators in Maslow’spyramid do not require money).McClelland’s Theory of Three Essential Human MotivationsDavid McClelland more or less continued in the same vein as Maslow (trying to determine howemployees are motivated) by identifying three essential employee needs. He characterized them as:Chapter 30Getting the Most from EmployeesWhen dealing with people, let us remember that weare not dealing with creatures of logic. We are dealingwith creatures of emotion who are bristling withprejudices and motivated by pride and vanityDale Carnegie159© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business1. The Need for Achievement: the desire to do better, solve problems, and master complexity.2. The Need for Power: the desire to control other people and influence their behavior.3. The Need for Affiliation: the desire to have friendly relations with people (McClelland, 1961).McClelland argued that people, over time, acquire or develop different stages of these needs as aresult of their experiences and that each stage involves a distinct set of work environments. To ensureoptimum employee performance it’s therefore a manager’s duty to recognize the needs of employeesand create appropriate work settings to satisfy them. For example, delegation can satisfy a person’sneed for achievement or power, while the creation of project teams may satisfy affiliation needs.Herzberg’s Two-Factor TheoryIn 1967, Frederick Herzberg devised a two-factor motivation theory based on a broad study ofpeople at work. Herzberg concluded that there are two categories directly relating to job satisfaction:1. Work Content: includes what people do while at work.2. Work Setting: is the actual environment in which work is done.Herzberg states that these two areas must be handled separately. Work content involves satisfyingan employee’s sense of achievement, responsibility, and personal growth. Work setting factors (orhygiene factors) deal with an employees’ work environment. Therefore, if productivity is down andimprovements must be made, the manager needs to find out which of these factors needs attention.Adding piped-in music and painting work areas may necessary to improve employee work settings, butthese measures could be useless if the problem lies with work content. Likewise, improving job titles,introducing flexible work hours, acknowledging work and other intrinsic factors may not help withpoor environmental work concerns.Alderfer’s Existence-Related-Growth TheoryIn 1972, Clayton Alderfer sought to improve on Maslow’s hierarchical pyramid by condensing itsfive categories into three:1. Existence Needs: the desire for physiological and material well-being.2. Relatedness Needs: the desire to improve interpersonal relationships.3. Growth Needs: the desire to pursue personal growth and fulfillment.Alderfer’s theory is meant to be more flexible than Maslow’s. Alderfer says that people can moveup and down his hierarchy of needs at any given time. If, for example, a higher need can’t be fulfilled,a lower previously satisfied need can be re-activated in its place in what Alderfer calls a frustrationregression principle.So Which Theory is Best?The success of any management theory depends on the employee, the situation, and the manager.Put another way, the answer tends to become more obvious when a business owner knows his or herbusiness, makes the effort to listen to employees and understand their character, and is involved in allaspects of the workplace.Achievement, growth, and creativity form the foundation of many motivational factor theories,however, they are little more than words if they’re not put into practice. For example, in the authorbiography section mentioned at the start of this book, it is stated that I turned around threebusinesses. The statement is accurate, but in each of these organizations I only ever came up with ahalf dozen solutions to the seemingly infinite number of problems encountered. The staff conceivedthe remaining ones. As their manager, I merely let them succeed - something none of my predecessorshad allowed. Mind you, it took months to train these people to be responsible (and brave) enough tosolve their own work challenges, but after that mountain was climbed each business improved in leapsand bounds. Simply put, as a manager I did not have a monopoly on intellect or achievement.160© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessBy allowing my employees to reach the top of Maslow’s Pyramid (i.e.: allowing them to put intoaction their own creative solutions) their jobs became more fulfilling and rewarding and they workedharder. Equally as true is that they ended up requiring less supervision.Getting to the Top of the PyramidIs it important to predetermine a precise way for an employee to do perform or her job? In somecases, yes - set procedures must be followed due to safety and other factors. Otherwise, no. It’ssometimes pointless to compare what an employee would do in similar circumstances. In most cases aresult is more important and should suit the task’s purpose. In other words, if a solution is notcontingent upon its process, then the talents and abilities of employees should be left to their ownaccord. This is more than just a philosophical argument. If the right people are hired, trainedaccordingly, and provided with whatever is necessary to complete their jobs, then the manager need tobe extracting as much from these people as you can. The early stage of this process is called delegation(transferring a manager’s decision-making authority and ability to act to a subordinate). Delegationinvolves:1. choosing the right employees for the right job,2. informing employees of exactly what needs to be done (creating responsibility),3. providing each employee with any relevant information (training),4. discussing with employees how they are to achieve their objective (establishing workperimeters),5. giving employees the tools necessary to accomplish their objective (handing over authority),and,6. reviewing the results (enforcing accountability).The point of delegation is to get something done by someone else, which does not mean simplyassigning someone to do a task. Delegation usually also allows employees to choose and implementhow that task will be done so that a sense of growth and achievement can be created. Delegation letsemployees show the world what they are capable of accomplishing - and if the right people are hiredand appropriately trained then that should amount to quite a lot. As one entrepreneur questioned forthis book put it, whenever an employee screws up it’s usually the manager’s fault for: 1) hiring orchoosing the wrong employee, 2) not training the employee correctly, or, 3) not replacing the employeewhen it became clear that he or she was not suited for the job.Taking the Fear out of DelegationFor most managers, delegation is not a choice. Most managers have more work than one personcan be expected to perform. Thus the question is not ‘should I delegate?’ but rather ‘how?’ Many yearsago I worked with a man who said that his father taught him to swim by dragging him to a lake andthrowing him in. He ended up thrashing around in the water for quite some time before he was finallyrescued. Ridiculous? Yes. But for many managers this ‘sink or swim’ philosophy represents the veryessence of how they delegate. Conversely, other managers insist that they can’t trust their employeesso they don’t delegate at all. They then try and do everything themselves while complaining (orbragging) that they’re overworked. The result is that employees live up to the misguided reputationplaced upon them and aren’t used to their full potential. Following are some typical argumentsinsecure managers use to avoid delegating:Myth #1: If tasks are routinely delegated to employees they’ll gain experience and skills, which willeventually be used against me.The Reality: Business owners do not lose out when they find and develop good people. Mostemployees, if they’re treated and trained well, will reciprocate in kind.Myth #2: Because a manager is ultimately responsible for every delegated task, it’s easier and safer161© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessfor a manager to do everything himself or herself.The Reality: A manager’s time is limited. It’s usually not possible for a manager to do everythingthere is to do in a business. Certain tasks and responsibilities must be handed to others.Myth #3: A manager gives up power when delegating - thereby decreasing his or her effectivenessand authority.The Reality: Delegation increases a manager’s influence among employees. This enables mostmanagers to widen their span of control and increase their powerbase.Myth #4: Delegation demoralizes employees because most managers delegate the most boringtasks to their subordinates and leave the best stuff for themselves.The Reality: If managers chose to only do the fun tasks, they probably wouldn’t also be able toperform the tasks for which they alone are responsible.Making Delegation Work for YouThe following twelve steps should help eliminate most delegation pitfalls:1. Don’t assign duties because you don’t want to perform them. This includes managerial functionssuch as providing feedback, reprimanding, hiring/firing, training, motivating, handling sensitiveissues, team-building and so on.2. Clarify an assignment before it’s delegated. Determine what is being delegated, the resultsexpected, and any time limitations. Unless specific methods must be adhered to, concentrate onthe results the employee must achieve.3. Choose the right person for the right job and ensure that he or she has the time and motivation tocomplete it. Delegation is designed to provide opportunities – not teach employees a lesson orput them in their place. Know who is ready to handle more responsibility as well as how hardthis person can be pushed.4. Determine work perimeters. Let employees know exactly what they can and cannot do as well aswhat will make their job easier and any damaging practices they should avoid.5. Make delegation a gradual process by giving employees time to gain confidence. The key is to provideemployees with enough rope to do something constructive without having them hangthemselves. Can the task be done in stages?6. Discuss the task with the employee. Allow employees to participate in discussions concerning whatthey are expected to do as well as how much authority they have and the standards by whichthey’ll be judged.7. Inform others about the delegation. Failure to inform other employees of an impending delegationincreases the likelihood of conflict and decreases the chance that the delegated task will be doneefficiently.8. Allow the employee to make as many decisions as possible. Unless your decisions are significantlybetter than the employee’s, let them use their own. Doing so is highly rewarding andmotivating.9. Expect a mistake or two. With appropriate monitoring you should be able to catch mistakesbefore they get out of hand. Mistakes are a part of every learning process and tend to show atthe very least that something is being done.10. Establish feedback controls. Regular monitoring will enable important problems or expensivemistakes to be identified at an early stage. Let the employee know that help is available ifneeded or additional information/training is required (the catchy phrase for this is, delegate don’tabdicate).11. When problems arise, insist on solutions. Along with ensuring that the employee is not abandoned,it’s important that the he or she does not keep running back to you with every problem162© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessencountered. Insist that whenever a problem arises, the employee comes to you with possiblesolutions rather than just the problem.12. Review results and reward good performance. Let the employee know how he/she is doing. Moreoften than not, people hunger for the chance to show how much they can accomplish. Afteremployees have successfully completed a task, praise any progress and politely address anyset-backs so that you can continue to get the most from them and ensure that they’ll keepcoming back for more.Taking the Next StepThe security, emotions, and well-being of employees have a direct effect on the service given topaying customers. Unfortunately, employees (and managers) don’t always have their prioritiesstraight when it comes to servicing others. In too many businesses, individuals constantly battleagainst one another - each confident that their input and sense of direction is the most valid. Indeed,one of the greatest challenges of management lies in understanding that people are motivated for theirown reasons, not a manager’s reasons. In other words, ideas, rules, and regulations cannot beimplemented unless the employees who have to work with them will work with them. Thus, it isdependent on managers to provide employees with incentives for self-motivation. This doesn’t meanallowing everyone to go off in different directions. Strong leadership must be shown and it must beemphasized that employees, when they are allowed to regularly make their own decisions, will face therewards or consequences of what they choose to do. The word for this is empowerment.Employee EmpowermentEmployee empowerment is the transfer of on-going job-related authority and responsibility frommanagement to workers (in contrast, delegation is task-oriented meaning that it usually involves onetask or job). Like delegation, empowerment can be used to motivate employees by allowing them todevelop their own self-worth and, to some degree, operate autonomously. Its purpose is to keep abusiness customer driven and flexible. The empowerment process begins by establishing clear goalsand guidelines and accepting the fact that when an employee gains power his or her manager is notgiving it up.Empowerment in ActionIn Brazil, a country wracked by continuous economic problems, the Semco corporation keepschugging along. Semco manufactures (among other things) turn-key biscuit factories, giant marinepumps, and industrial mixers that blend everything from rocket fuel to bubble gum. Before it acquiredits fame, Semco suffered from the usual rundown of corporate problems. But after collapsing twicefrom stress-induced illnesses, CEO Ricardo Semler realized that something radical had to be done tochange the way he managed his company. In his book, Maverick, Semler describes how over a periodof several years he gradually handed over power and authority to his employees. This includedallowing machine operators to lease Semco’s expensive tools and machinery for their own purposes aswell as assisting skilled employees to use the company’s equipment and materials to set up their ownbusinesses with Semco as their leading customer. Company executives at first derided these decisions,predicting that chaos – or worse - would ensue. But Semler thought differently. He began by teachinghis workers basic finance and accounting principles. This brought many employees to the previouslyinconceivable conclusion that the company’s profits did not go straight into the bank accounts of topmanagers. Employees also learned to make their own decisions, quickly realizing that everyoneultimately benefited when the company did. Thus, workers were assured of job security if theyprudently solved their own problems, cut costs, increased quality and production, worked together asa team, and weeded out laggards. Incredibly, employees grew so adept at this that they eventually settheir own salaries. In effect, they had become the caretakers of the company that employed them andas such they became responsible for its triumphs. Offered a choice between success and failure, they163© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesschose success. Give a man a fish, says an age-old philosophy, and he has a meal. Teach him how tofish, and he will feed himself for the rest of his life.Making Empowerment Work for YouObviously, empowering a workforce isn’t something that can happen overnight. Empowerment isa long process that demands strong leadership, honesty, cooperation, courage, and a commitment toserve from all involved. For employees, this means:- Handling responsibility while realizing that constant learning and training are a part ofevery job.- Understanding that the ownership of problems and solutions belongs to everyone in thebusiness (i.e.: problem prevention and work ownership).- Accepting the fact that everyone needs to serve others and pull in the same direction.- Acting on the fact that showing up for work and performing bottom-line duties is not enough –wages are given for value created2.- Displaying caring, integrity and trust.For managers, empowerment involves:- Viewing workers as assets (not expenditures) and recognizing their value.- Sharing information and providing good training.- Listening, asking, valuing, and then acting on other’s viewpoints and ideas.- Creating a motivating environment conducive to creativity, participation and innovation.- Working toward preventing problems, not just battling them.- Rewarding good performance.- Displaying caring, integrity, and trust.- Prudently choosing the right people for the right jobs.- Ensuring that employees and departments serve each other (pull in the same direction).Another Example of Empowerment in ActionYears ago, a large retail operation in the United States watched its sales plummet. Managersblamed the company’s failure on the faltering economy, yet in the same area of the country a similarsized operation prospered. Investigations later revealed that the first retailer used an employeemanual the size and thickness of a phone book. In militant detail, it dictated to employees how tothink, dress, behave, and carry out their duties. The second retailer had a different approach. Itsemployee manual is written on a single 5 x 8 inch card that carries this message:Welcome to Our Company. We’re glad to have you with us.Our number one goal is to provide outstanding customer service.Set your personal and professional goals high, we have great confidence in your abilities.Our Rules:Rule 1. Use your good judgment in all situationsThere will be no additional rules.(Please feel free to approach the department manager, store manager, or division managerif you have any questions at any time)2 ‘Creating value’ is a term so overused in business and management literature that it’s become a cliché. Creating value means going theextra mile or doing more than what is expected. Far too many people believe that congratulations should be awarded for responsibilities as basic asshowing up for work on time, keeping promises and commitments, rectifying mishaps, and so on. In business, however, (as in life) ‘points’ shouldnot be awarded for common expectations (i.e.: doing what is supposed to be done). Value is therefore created when a person goes beyond theminimum requirements expected of him or her.164© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessStill not convinced that empowerment works? Then answer the following questions:1. Which of these companies would you rather work for, the first or the second?2. Do you think that allowing employees to use their own judgment means that management haslost control?The Importance of Feedback‘If it can’t be measured it can’t be managed,’ a shop owner suggests. She went on to confidentlyconclude that this statement, or variations of it, could be used to describe almost anything pertainingto management. Most of the entrepreneurs I speak with agree. Prompt, precise measurement, placedin the context of feedback, is arguably one of the quickest and cheapest ways to obtain good results.Feedback can be provided at three stages of a work task:1. Before the task begins2. During the task3. At the end of the taskWhen feedback should be used is contingent upon the situation. However, whether formal orinformal, it must remain timely (the ‘fresher’ it is, the better), honest, simple, and constructive.George Bernard Shaw once said that the greatest problem in communication is the illusion that it has beenaccomplished. Feedback should therefore be given so the recipient hears it without distractions.Feedback should also avoid personal comments as well as situations that are out of the recipient’scontrol. Following are examples of the types of feedback that exist in most work places:- The Establishing of ‘Norms’ – Norms are acceptable perimeters of behavior set by bothmanagement and employees and are either written down in a ‘Codes of Conduct’ format or leftup to employees to decide. Once norms have been established, organizational culture and peerpressure often enforces corrective behavior. Examples include knowing to be quiet in a library(or on a golf course) because everyone else is.- Success and Failure Systems – Most businesses set employee targets and goals. If they’re too high,they may result in failure with the subsequent eroding of motivation. If they’re too easy, a senseof accomplishment is eluded.- Recognition – If an employee does a task well and is recognized for it, then similar successfulbehavior can be expected in the future. If no recognition takes place, a message is sent that noone cares. Recognition doesn’t necessarily translate into award ceremonies or cash bonuses(although these can be appropriate). Often a few words of thanks are all that’s needed.- Evaluations – Employees need to regularly know how they are doing. Evaluations let them knowthe answer to that question with the added benefit of reminding them that the work they do isbeing monitored. Yearly or biannual reviews, however, should not become a tedious and banalformality where little or no communication occurs. Evaluations should be a constructiveexercise that clears the air and lets all concerned know where they stand, what improvementsneed to be made, and where they’re heading. See Chapter 20 for a reminder of this concept.Reprimands and PunishmentSometimes, after all else has failed, a punishment is necessary to correct an employee’s behavior.This should be done in private with a cool head. The following should also be considered:- Punishments treat people equally.- Punishments are not designed to humiliate people, hold grudges, or accept excuses.- Punishments must be immune to power plays, whims, and abuse.- Punishments should be designed to encourage better behavior on the part of the person being165© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesspunished. (See Chapter 20 and the section titled ‘Dealing with Consistently Poor Performance’):Modifying Unacceptable BehaviorOn the face of it, Sir Isaac Newton’s Third Law of Motion, which states that every action brings aboutan equal and opposite reaction, can also be applied quite readily to humans. This is demonstrated via asimple model of human behavior:trigger action payoffAs this simple diagram suggests, most problems have a cause (a trigger) that sets off an action andends with some form of payoff. For example, imagine that an employee comes to work late on a dayin which he or she was needed to arrive on time. How can a business operator prevent this scenariofrom happening again? One way is through a process called behavioral modification (i.e.: recognizing anaction and its payoff; and finding and dealing with the trigger). Following are the five steps behaviormodification involves:1. Recognize the behavior. Find out who/what is influenced by the employee’s behavior and whetherthat behavior is worth correcting.2. Analyze the behavior. What triggered it? According to psychologists, every human action ispreceded by a trigger which is followed by a perceived payoff. When analyzing someone’sbehavior, dig deep and find the trigger (the cause of the action) and the payoff (the reward theemployee thinks he or she receives).3. Seek out possible solutions. Calmly sit down with the person(s) who performed the behavior andget some feedback. Perhaps the trigger was a one-time-only event, or, the employee wasn’taware of the consequences of his or her action and mentioning it is all that’s necessary for it toend.4. Implement a solution. People usually don’t do things unless there is a payoff. In a calm andrational manner, modify the trigger or payoff by adding a consequence that is either positive ornegative (ideally, it should be positive).5. Monitor the results. If the results work, continue along the same lines and look for anothersolvable problem. If they fail, go back and try something else.Staying with our example of the employee arriving at work late, perhaps his or her behavior issingular in that it happens rarely. If the employee is late because of a traffic accident (the trigger) thenhis or her tardiness can be overlooked. If the employee is always late because of traffic, his or herbehavior may need to be modified (perhaps by getting up earlier). Or perhaps the employee has apersonal problem and needs some time off work to sort the problem out - a few days off now mayprevent weeks of additional problems later. Either way, someone needs to sit down and discuss theconsequences of the employee’s actions (provide corrective feedback) so that no payoff is perceived bythe employee. He or she may not be aware of the difficulties that were caused and may feel ashamedand embarrassed when it’s discovered that everyone had to perform extra duties to cover theemployee’s lateness. Peer pressure or group ‘norms’ may then prevent future problems. Or perhapsmaking the employee perform extra duties as compensation, or docking his or her wages will eliminatethe perceived payoff. The solution to the problem depends on the employee, the environment, thesituation, and the manager. The aim is to deal with the trigger so that it does not occur again – whileensuring that the corrective action that’s taken does not lead to future or compounded problems.The End DesireEmployees are a reflection of the business they serve. When they have shown that they can handletheir jobs, they should be congratulated and, if appropriate, given more responsibility. Only then canyou as a manager begin to:- reduce your workload,166© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgGetting the Most from Employees — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- tap into your workforce,- create an atmosphere of problem prevention and personal responsibility (work ownership), and,- provide the ultimate in human motivation.For a quick reminder of suggestions on how to hire good employees, re-consult Chapter 10 and thesection on staffing problems.Advice from the Pros- Never stop training employees. The more time that’s given to training employees, the less timewill be spent punishing them or ‘fighting fires’.- Communicate regularly with the people who work for you. If you don’t take the time to talk toyour employees about little things that don’t matter, they will never approach you with thethings that do.- Establish a set of written employee rules and company policies and put together a thoroughtraining program before hiring. If you want employees to perform well they will need to knowwhat the rules are and what is expected of them.- Always check the backgrounds and references of prospective employees. By law, you may not beable to ask if a candidate has ever been in jail, or has sued a previous employer, or is a pain in theneck to work with, but you can often find the answers to these questions by checkingbackgrounds or discrepancies.- To avoid legal problems during an employee interview, concentrate on the specifics of the workthe candidate will be expected to perform. Otherwise, you may find yourself being sued fordiscrimination. Consider giving candidates a skill test to ensure that they can do what you want.Similarly, establish a temporary work trial period during which time it can be determined if theperson is right for the job and your business.- Hire people whose skills and abilities compensate for your weaknesses.- Salaries and wages are usually the single greatest expense a business incurs. To keep wage costsdown, consider offering employees a lower wage coupled with some form of commission for thework they do. That way, the harder they work, the more money they (and your business) willearn.- Don’t try to run a business by hiring cheap labor. As the saying goes, if you pay peanuts, you’llget monkeys.- Consider arming your sales team with gadgets such as laptops, Blackberries, and/or Treo smartphones. Communication devices with wireless technology allow a business to do more byhelping employees respond promptly to customers no matter where they are.- The simplest, most cost-effective, and most powerful way to motivate employees is to verballyrecognize the work they do and thank them for it. Strangely, although this costs nothing, manymanagers find it impossible to do.- One of the surveys conducted for this book revealed that more than a few business owners havesuffered from employee theft. To add insult to injury, many of the culprits caught stealing werepartners or trusted individuals who thought they were entitled to what they took. To avoidhaving this happen to you, take the following precautions:• Conduct regular inventories and pay attention to purchases and shipment numbers.• Never let up on your supervisory duties. Periodically review employee work.• Ensure employees take holidays. Thieves can’t steal while they’re away from the job andtheir absence may reveal discrepancies.• Evenly distribute duties amongst your employees or overlap their responsibilities. There isless chance of theft if more then one person is in control of a task or area.167© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.org• Never relinquish check-signing authority or banking authorization to employees.A recent study conducted by the Institute of Business Ethics revealed that ethical companies thatconduct business in a straight-forward manner consistently outperform those that do not. The ToroCompany, for example, a tractor and lawnmower manufacturer in Minnesota, decided in 1991 to stopfighting lawsuits placed against it by customers who suffered from accidents – even when the customercaused the accident. Toro has since settled 1,100 cases (only one of which went to court). As a result,the company’s average cost per case dropped from $80,000 to $20,000 – perhaps giving credence tothe notion that taking full responsibility for a product is not only good for the soul it’s also good forthe bottom line (Gray, 2006).An Introduction to Social ResponsibilityWhen making day-to-day decisions, every entrepreneur chooses to what extent he or she wishes tobe responsible to his or her customers as well as the business’s local community. The options are asfollows:- Social Disregard occurs when a business, for the most part, does whatever it wants, regardless ofthe consequences.- Social Obligation is met when a business chooses to meet its legal responsibilities and nothingmore.- Social Responsiveness occurs when a business changes its policies in regards to social conditionsor customer pressures. (For example, pressure from consumer groups was so strong that severaltuna manufacturers decided to buy their tuna from fisherman that used dolphin-friendlyharvesting methods – which resulted in increased sales. )- Social Responsibility occurs when a business decides to pursue long-term goals that are good forsociety, thereby hoping to boost the business’s bottom line. The DuPont Corporation, forexample, began manufacturing gunpowder in the 18th century. In the 1900’s, weary of its ‘deathtrade’, it transformed itself into a chemical and synthetics producer. By 2000, due to increasingenvironmental concerns, it began converting into a renewable resource business by replacing itspetrochemical-based products with clean and sustainable technologies.Doing Good is Good for BusinessOddly enough, social responsibility is seen in a negative light by to many business stakeholders.The belief is that acts of social responsibility are little more than publicity stunts performed in thehope that they will produce more profit. For example, in an infamous 1970 article published in TheNew York Times Magazine, Nobel Prize-winning economist Milton Friedman stated that shareholdersare cheated when businesses spend time, money, and resources in socially responsible ways -- despitethe fact that there’s plenty of evidence which proves that financial profit and doing the right thing areoften complimentary. For example, 57% of the successful business operators studied for this booksaid that they regularly partake in socially responsible activities and that these activities boosted sales(although none kept records that showed exactly how much their sales increased as a result of theirbenevolent activities).To illustrate how socially responsible actions can benefit a small business is to look at the work oflegendary entrepreneur Gottlieb Duttweiler. In 1925, Duttweiler began selling fruit and vegetables onChapter 31Ethics and Social ResponsibilityI have seen the enemy and he is usPogo (Walt Kelly)168© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEthics and Social Responsibility — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthe streets of Switzerland from the back of delivery trucks (he named his enterprise Migros). For thenext 37-years, as Migros grew into a multi-million dollar giant, Duttweiler continuously battledagainst monopolistic business practices, government authorities, and ruthless cartels, each of whomendeavored to keep food prices artificially high. Duttweiler had an epic struggle on his hands becauserefusing to sell food at a premium got him into a great deal of trouble. Yet by the time of his death in1962 he managed to lower the cost of food in Switzerland by 25%. He did this while refusing to drawa salary greater than that paid to his managers and by encouraging his suppliers to do the same.Throughout his life he also adamantly insisted (and proved) that the more money he donated to goodcauses (charities, education centers, profit-sharing schemes and so on) the more money poured backinto his coffers. In fact, he often complained that every time he tried to be benevolent purely for thesake of doing good and being responsible, more money always found its way back into his business.By thinking about others Duttweiler showed that socially responsible practices yield dividends.More Examples of Social Responsibility Leading to Increased ProfitsAlthough being socially responsible can make solid financial sense, many business operators insistthat they do it for reasons that are other than financial. For example, the former owner of JimmyBradley’s Irish Pub in Warsaw, Poland insisted that although 10% of his revenues directly result fromthe contributions he makes to charities, orphanages, and local sports programs, he would continue todonate money to worthy causes even if he didn’t experience its financial rewards because that waswhat he was taught as a boy.Similarly, in South Africa, Pick n’ Pay employees have shown solidarity with those less fortunate –including shaving their heads or wearing bandanas as a sign of support to those needing bone marrowtransplants – because many of them have experienced the effects of poverty firsthand. In the processthey’ve collected over one million rand in charitable donations, solidified the loyalty of countlessclients, helped attract hundreds of new customers, and generated untold amounts of free publicity forPick n’ Pay.In the United States, socially responsible practices include ‘receipt promotions’ where smallbusinesses ask customers to save their receipts (as well as those of friends and family) for aprearranged period of time. On the day the receipts are collected, the businesses then donate 1% ofthe receipt totals to a predetermined charitable cause. Similar schemes are conducted by businesses inthe United Kingdom, with proceeds used to buy computers and books for schools (thereby generatingenthusiastic involvement from thousands of school children and their families). Additional examplesof social responsibility programs include:- Setting up childcare centers in the workplace for the children of employees (which solidifiesemployee commitment).- Offering internship programs to college students (thereby creating lifelong customers).- Donating time, profits, or products to charities (which is good for publicity).- Supporting environmental issues.- Sponsoring local athletic teams, children’s programs, and local events (which generates customersupport and loyalty as well as free advertising).- Allowing charities to place collection boxes or literature at your place of work (which allows yourbusiness to network while reaching out to its community).- Assisting employees with their education needs (which builds loyalty).Unfortunately, despite these inspiring examples the media regularly bombards us with stories that showcompanies behaving in socially irresponsible and unethical ways. The Enron scandals in 2002, for example,resulted in the bankruptcy of the world’s seventh largest corporation, the loss of thousands of jobs, and thedemise of Arthur Anderson - one of the largest, and, up to then, most prestigious accounting firms on theplanet. Ironically, according to some analysts, one of the reasons Enron was able to get away with its169© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEthics and Social Responsibility — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessillegalities for so long was because it publicized the fact that 1% of its profits were given to charitable causes,thereby throwing the public off the scent of its true nature for years.One of the more infamous examples of social irresponsibility occurred in the tobacco industry,which is still reeling from lawsuits caused by decades of lies. In another example, the terrorist attackson the 11th of September 2001, resulted in the naming and shaming of hotels that raised their ratesknowing that journalists and aid organizations would arrive en mass. Additional examples ofunethical behavior include toothpastes that don’t whiten teeth in the manner their manufacturersclaim; cosmetics that don’t roll back the signs of aging or reduce cellulite; and products that kill orinjure their users (only to have the companies that produce them deny it or cover it up). Add to thisthe clandestine polluters, unfair competitors, inside traders, cheaters, greed mongers, and fat catCEO’s who destroy company market share while being rewarded with dismissal packages worthhundreds of millions of dollars and you’d be forgiven for wondering if the words ‘business’ and ‘ethics’are compatible. Cheer up, however, because all is not lost. The reason these businesses are in thenews is because they got caught – which is usually what happens to businesses that behaveunethically.Learning Right from WrongEthics is defined as being good, moral, truthful, honest, and sincere. Behaving ethically meansacting with integrity, thinking of others, saying what is meant and meaning what is said. Like quality,ethics is an all-encompassing concept in that a business can’t be a little bit ethical or somewhat ethical.It either is or it isn’t.Can ethics be learned or taught? Some people say ‘yes’, others say ‘no’; at the very least most of usdo know the difference between right and wrong. Yet when many of the world’s issues fade intoshades of grey it’s probably best to rely on what customers consider to be ethical and to act accordingly.In the age of Internet accessibility it’s becoming increasingly difficult to hide unethical behavior. This isimportant because behaving in an ethical manner is an integral part of long-term business success.The operator of the RemSpecReserve trading company in Pechersk, Russia, for example, (as well asseveral other business owners questioned for this book) says that the reputation of his business is hismost important asset. Customers nowadays have access to more information and have more choicesthan ever before so it only makes sense to behave ethically.Recognized Reasons for Behaving Ethically- From an internal customer’s (employee’s) standpoint, behaving ethically:- produces a sense of pride in the workplace (which helps provide motivation),- sets a good example, and,- raises an organization’s level of perceived fairness.- From an external customer’s standpoint, behaving ethically:- decreases the chances of a business being sued,- provides another good reason to buy a business’s products, and,- raises everybody’s level of responsibility and consciousness.Trying to Rationalize Unethical BehaviorHow do otherwise intelligent people make unethical business decisions? Usually by kiddingthemselves with one or more of the following justifications:- It’s only a little unethical. Perhaps the rationalization is that ‘everybody else is doing it’ or theoutcome of the decision seems trivial. Either way, it’s still boils down to doing something wrong.Eventually, someone will be held accountable for it - particularly if a scapegoat is being sought orsomeone is seeking ammunition against someone else.170© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEthics and Social Responsibility — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- No one will find out. ‘Unless it’s discovered,’ goes the argument, ‘it’s not really unethical.’ Baloney.Little these days goes undetected and very few people are bright enough to cover all their tracks.It may take a while, but someone, someday will probably find out what was done and by whom.If you’re stupid enough to do something unethical, you’re stupid enough to get caught.- It’s in everyone’s best interest. This is a very difficult dilemma for many small businesses. Forexample, if a buyer or shipper demands that a bribe be paid before services will be rendered,what can the business do? Overcoming this situation depends in part on the ability to lookbeyond short-term gains and address long-term implications.- My business (or employees) will stand behind me. Yeah, right. And so will Santa Claus, the EasterBunny and the Tooth Fairy.How to Make an Ethical DecisionMake no mistake, people who act unethically do so at their own peril. When making a decision putyourself and your business through both rounds of the following questions to ensure a good outcome.Round 1 (questions to ask at a collective level)1. Legality. Is what the business wishes to do legal?2. Fairness. How will the decision’s outcome affect the people who are involved with it?3. Self-Respect. Do the people involved in the decision feel good about it and its outcome?4. Long-Term Effects. Short-sighted solutions are rarely an answer. Will the decision create ordestroy job security? What are the risks/dangers? How will the business’s internal and externalenvironments be affected? Will taking the unethical route save money or will more be lost in thelong run?Round 2 (questions to ask at the individual level)1. Purpose. Do you understand and accept the real reasons or intentions of what is being done?2. Perception. Have you considered the feelings and well-being of those affected by your decision?3. Persistence. Have you remained flexible to other people’s viewpoints, yet committed to your ownfaith and beliefs?4. Perspective. Did you comprehend the whole picture and determine what is really important?5. Pride. Are you happy with your decision? Do you want to be held accountable for it?An Overall Ethical Litmus TestIf you’re ever in doubt as to whether something you wish to do is unethical, ask yourself thefollowing question: ‘Would I do this in front of my spouse, or my children, or my friends oremployees)?’ If the answer is ‘no’, then you have your answer.The Bottom LineBeing ethical doesn’t cost anything. Being unethical can cost dearly. Don’t be fooled into thinkingthat unethical actions won’t be discovered or that a business that turns its back on its community canreach its full potential. Customers aren’t stupid and they do end up knowing just about everythingthat goes on in an organization. It may sound corny, but unethical and unsociable practices make theworld poorer in almost every conceivable way. No business gets ahead in the marketplace by thinkingselfishly. What goes around comes around and the truth is that if a business is honest and reputable- and is an integral part of its community - its chances of survival will greatly improve. In other words,as one entrepreneur put it, businesses that succeed are usually the ones that are in some way beneficialto everyone that touches them.Advice from the Pros- Every enterprise should operate under the concept that customers only want to do businesswith organizations they can trust.171© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgEthics and Social Responsibility — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Remember that you’re in business to sell a product, not your soul.- Always try to exceed the expectations of customers. Going the extra mile for customers is apractice that will never let you down.- Make it a habit to ask customers for their feedback and opinions – then listen to what is beingsaid. Your business cannot grow and mature without the viewpoints of others.- Regardless of the circumstances, always do everything possible to maintain the respect of youremployees and paying customers. Treat everyone who walks through the door of your businesswith courtesy.- Regularly evaluate your business’s documents including, brochures, advertising, employeeguidelines, etc… to ensure that they’re accurate, clear, precise, and professional.172© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPART IVSTRENGTHENINGAND GROWING173© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIn Thailand, women who compete against one another to make and sell homemade rice noodles,pool their resources and purchase a rice noodle machine which they all share. In Australia, a buildingdesigner teams with a rival architectural firm, a renewable energy supply business, and a constructioncompany to create affordable, energy efficient homes. In the United States, a business that producesmerchandise made from wood enters into talks with a plastics injection firm to discuss a packagingidea. Across the globe, two Fortune 500 businesses (Nestle and Coca-Cola) combine their marketingand distribution forces to sell each other’s ready-to-drink beverages worldwide. In other markets,Nestle sells General Mills’ ‘Cheerios’ cereal and the Seiko Watch Company markets Schick razors. Whatin the world is going on?Cooperating BusinessesWith increasing frequency, both large and small businesses are discovering that by joining togetherwith carefully chosen partners each can readily accomplish what was impossible for just one businesson its own. This is not a new concept. 42% of the business operators questioned for this book saidthat they’ve joined with other businesses (sometimes a competitor) at one time or another in order tomaximize their profits. 7% of those who had not said they would like to do so in the near future.The practice of businesses joining together to achieve a common goal is often referred to as acooperative network. A cooperative network allows a company to work with either a competitor or aseemingly unrelated business (or both) on a temporary or permanent basis. Cooperative networkingis similar in principle to cooperatives, co-ops, or collectives, in that all three can be defined as a group ofindividual entities that join together to undertake an activity for the mutual benefit of all.Why do competing groups of people or businesses decide to act together? Usually because going italone requires considerable cost, effort, and risk – all of which can be reduced when others getinvolved.In practice, the number of people or businesses involved in business cooperatives can range fromtwo to over 100. In Europe, for example, cooperative networks account for 83% of Dutch agriculturalproduction, 55% of Italian agricultural production, 21% of Spanish healthcare, and over 50% ofFrench banking services. On the European continent alone, companies partaking in cooperativebusiness networks employ more than 4.8 million people; 20% more than the total workforce of largecorporations in these same regions. The common goals of these cooperating businesses include:- joint purchasing projects (purchasing raw materials, expensive machinery, tools, or productionfacilities, or renewable power sources [such as wind turbines], from which all members canbenefit),- the sharing of resources and skills (pooling information, expertise, or systems to providemember businesses with a complete range of skills, services, and goods),- identifying and researching market opportunities (finding and tapping into customer basespreviously not considered [perhaps by combining one or more products or services with that ofanother business]),- combining marketing resources and expertise (promoting the services and products ofcooperative partners in advertising schemes, trade shows, and promotions), and,Chapter 32Cooperative NetworkingBy union the smallest states thrive.By discord the greatest are destroyedSallust174© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCooperative Networking — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- combining logistics and operations (offering coordinated deliveries, designing product, service orevent ‘packages’, and improving production capacity by sharing production lines).Agricultural producers in many countries are a good example of the goals mentioned above. Many havediscovered that by joining together they can purchase and share expensive planting and harvestingequipment, decide which crops each member should farm, and even set a fixed price for wholesalers. Thisprevents having to needlessly compete against other growers, decreases risk in the marketplace, and ensuresa fair outcome for each participant. The legendary success and stability of cooperative networks, however, isperhaps the most enticing factor for joining together. Although cooperative networks are not infallible,businesses that cooperate are more apt to satisfy social and entrepreneurial objectives, avoid ethical andlegal lapses, and, in general, appear to be more economically vigorous and competitive, especially againstlarger rivals (Lotti, 2006).Getting Over the HurdlesFor many small business owners the notion of sharing ideas, equipment, employees, and customers (notto mention discussing problems and forming partnerships with competitors) evokes strong negativeemotions. This is particularly true of businesses that view the role of their rivals as an adversarial one.Other businesses, like K7 Communications in Hull, England insist that forming alliances is fundamental tosurvival. Either way, the notion of networking can become more palatable once it’s understood thatcooperation is not about giving away trade secrets, but rather working with another business in acomplimentary way. No company should involve itself in a network if the benefits of joining areoutweighed by the costs and risks. The idea is to enhance the competitiveness of each business, reducecosts, create new capital bases, increase advantages of scale, scope, and speed, and open up new markets.By doing so a new way of thinking is required – one that replaces the traditional business mind-set, whichstates that in order to survive every company must do its own research, product design, marketing, officesupport, financial functions, production, and management.What Type of Businesses Prosper Most?The first and foremost indicator of a successful business network is a common purpose. Even seeminglyunrelated businesses can prosper from cooperation if they share the same goal. Consider the DesertKnowledge Australia (DKA) network project. The outback of Australia is an enormous area containingthousands of small businesses. Despite the fact that many are hundreds of miles apart they still competefor tourism dollars. In the past this competition resulted in the development of numerous factions andrivalries that often did more harm than good. With the introduction of the DKA network project, however,the combined resources of many businesses have enticed a wider array of customers by introducing ‘desertexperience’ packages. These include inter-linking activities such as sporting events, pub-crawls, heritagetrails, eco-tours, and so on, interspersed with restaurant deals, hotel accommodations, and transportservices. On their own, each of the businesses that offer these services may lack the skills or resources topromote itself to a wider customer base. Working together, however, they can. Furthermore, almost all ofthe companies involved now believe that cooperating with other businesses, apart from being practical, is anatural way to do business.Getting StartedHow do networks begin? Two methods seem to dominate. The first method uses a third party such as abusiness development centre or a chamber of commerce to bring different entities together and proposeworking in unison. The second involves the introduction of two or more like-minded businesspeople at asocial gathering (a newfound personal agreement between long-term acquaintances falls into this category).Either way, the ingredients for success seem to revolve around an established social environment, mutualinterests and trust combined with a can-do attitude.Once the details have been hammered out, the formation of a cooperation agreement is carried outthrough a variety of methods ranging from contractual agreements to a handshake. Every network has itsown unique method.175© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCooperative Networking — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdvantages and Disadvantages of Business NetworksOf course not every cooperative network deal is filled with sunshine. As with any group endeavorcooperative networks are often susceptible to people problems. For example, a network can collapsewhen a key player leaves or if members grow too like-minded and become immune to new ideas andnew ways of thinking. Similarly, networks can contain participants who take more than they give. Orthere might be a general falling out between individuals that results in the taking of sides. It has alsobeen said that some business networks can take a great deal of time to make a simple decision becauseall participants must be brought to the table to have their say.Supporters counter these arguments by stating that it’s easy to dismiss unproductive or disruptiveparticipants and that the more brains that are brought to the table for the purpose of making adecision the better. Moreover, proponents of cooperative networking state that once decisions aremade they’re often carried out quicker and with more enthusiasm than those made in bigcorporations. This is because commitment and involvement tend to be stronger when shared bypeople with a mutual interest who have reached an agreement together.When all is said and done, it appears that cooperative business networks operate under much thesame principles, and therefore need the same forms of maintenance, as those involved with managingteams. Additional advantages reported by businesses involved in cooperative networks include:- The establishment of improved communication pathways (if communication pathways arenurtured and encouraged).- Increased human development and innovation (from the sharing of skills and experiences).- Better long-range planning and experimentation due to the spreading of financial risk and thefact that most cooperatives are responsible to themselves rather than shareholders who demandnothing more than ever increasing returns on their investment.- The satisfying of social needs (i.e.: cooperating business do not feel alone).- An increased feeling of openness and learning, which is fostered by a genuine interest in whatother members have to offer.- Strength in numbers.- Increased feedback from customers, employees, and participants (usually because cooperatingpartners demand it).- Improved problem solving due to in-depth discussion and implementation – particularly when itcomes to servicing niche or specialized markets.- Improved motivation (ample research shows that close personal business ties heighten empathyand increase altruistic behavior). [Batson, 1990]The Rules of Cooperative Business NetworkingCooperative business networks rely heavily on relationship building. Put another way, the sameelements that create and foster human relationships (honesty, communication, straight forwardness,integrity, wisdom, honor, friendship, etc…) appear to be no different from those needed to maintainsuccessful business relationships. Unfortunately, with divorce rates as high as 50% (or more) in manycountries, it seems that many people are in the dark when it comes to relationship building. Perhapsthe expectation is that good relationships can unfold on their own with no real effort from the partiesinvolved. Or maybe too many wannabe network participants can’t be bothered to conduct a basicbackground check before they enter into a network agreement (which is tantamount to building arelationship on hope rather than reality). Following are a few suggestions designed to help networkingefforts produce results:1. Be prudent and careful as to whom you wish to do business with. The last outcome you want is todamage your business by connecting with dishonest brokers or tarnish your reputation through176© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgCooperative Networking — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessan association with a less than reputable network partner. Check the backgrounds of proposedcooperative partners and do a background check before shaking hands or signing on a dottedline.2. Be a good partner. Don’t adopt a single-minded ‘what’s in it for me’ attitude. Balance the needsof your business against those of your cooperating partners.3. Be honest and sincere. Always try to exceed the expectations of your partners. Never inflate yourbusiness’s abilities and never steal ideas or clients from cooperative partners.4. Take the initiative. Rather than waiting for partners to come to your aid, be the first to planmeetings, raise issues, tackle problems, and introduce needs.5. Stay committed. Enthusiasm, or the lack of it, is contagious. Keep in touch with your networkpartners by bringing them referrals and information on a regular basis. Such actions tend toensure reciprocation in kind.6. Be reasonable. Cooperative business networks are professional relationships and should not beconsidered as friendships. Keep partners close yet still at ‘arm’s length’.Advice from the Pros- Cooperative business networks are not for everyone, but they should never be ruled out becauseof ignorance or fear.- Check the background, attitude, and nature of any prospective business partner as you would aprospective employee.- Before joining a long-term cooperative business venture test run the partnership by partaking inone or two preliminary projects.- Trust is everything when it comes to cooperative business networks – and as with any humanundertaking, trust is developed when extra effort is voluntarily given and reciprocated.- Measure up the strengths and weaknesses inherent in a cooperative business network andensure a solid match is made with your business before rushing into a network agreement- Like any relationship, a business network relationship cannot be left on its own and requiresregular fine-tuning and attention.177© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgThe main objective of every business is to maximize profits. This means coping with changes inconsumer preferences, keeping up with improvements in production or delivery methods, takingadvantage of demographic changes, and staying on top of competitors. It is foolish for a business toload its shelves, website or catalogue with the same items year after year and expect the same sales.Yes, it’s possible (and often necessary) to have a line of products that can be relied upon to produce asteady stream of profits year in and year out. Sooner or later, however, the old standbys may stopproducing. With shelf space at a premium and customer preferences constantly changing, what can abusiness do to maximize its sales potential?The answer is to stay on top of trends and changes by providing new products and services. Andalthough the success rate for new products is often dismal, research and planning can improve thechances of success.Where do new product ideas come from? According to researchers, on average, about 30% comedirectly from customers (Reese, 1992). An additional 30% are derived from observing competitors.The remaining 40% are gathered from sales people, suppliers, and distributors (Czinkota, 1990). Referto the end of Chapter 3 for a reminder as to where the entrepreneurs questioned for this book getmost of their new product and service ideas.Manufacturing a New ProductThe decision to manufacture a new product should not be taken lightly. The amount of time,money, and manpower needed to create a new product demands that significant research beconducted to ensure that a costly mistake is not made. The 12 steps below depict the stages ofmanufacturing a new product:1. Define and record customer requirements. Who are the potential buyers of the proposed productand where are they located? How many of them are there and how much of the new productmight they buy? Thorough investigations into these questions have the potential to reveal asmany opportunities as pitfalls.2. Specify the product. Does it need to meet governmental safety codes? Does it require additional(or wholly different) distribution channels or production methods? Will customers want to see adistinct advantage with an (untried) version of the product to convince them to switch from acompetitor’s version?3. List and describe your business’s capabilities. If the strength of your business lies in moldingplastics you will probably want to use this material as a base component. Is this viable? Howmany units must be sold to cover your expenses? How many units of the new product can yourcurrent production system produce?4. Storyboard the process. Involve every employee and/or department (i.e.: write out and describe everyrequired step). Brainstorm with employees and ask for opinions. What will each employee ordepartment have to contribute to ensure success? What will the costs be?5. Begin engineering drawings and specifications. A workable design is needed from which theChapter 33Manufacturing New Products andServices (and Selling Them)If we don’t change we don’t grow.If we don’t grow, we aren’t really livingGail Sheehy178© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManufacturing New Products and Services — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessproduct can be produced. Do the specifications conform to customer, legal, and/or ISO 9001requirements? Can the product be designed in a way that makes it less harmful to theenvironment? Can the product be designed in a way that enables it to be taken apart quickly sothat its components can be recycled or remanufactured? This may save a lot of money –particularly if your business entices customers to return used products for re-manufacturingpurposes.6. Define a method for manufacturing the product. Perhaps a prototype should be built. If so, do it.Involve the input of as many employees as possible. Building a prototype provides valuablelessons for all concerned. Use only the methods and machinery available in your business. Doesmaking the product conform to initial designs and processes? What changes have to be made?7. Develop a list of needed materials (and overheads) and determine total costs. Will manufacturing theproduct on a mass scale be economically viable? How long will the manufacturing process take?Will the length of time meet customer expectations?8. Evaluate how manufacturing the new product will fit in with regular manufacturing tasks. Will thenew product adversely effect other commitments? Will it tie up needed machinery orequipment? Will it, or its components, take up too much warehouse or factory space?9. Re-evaluate the capacity of your business and again determine if the product can be produced in a timelyfashion. Can employees be adequately trained to comply with all needed processes, productionmethods, and sales techniques? Will the business be able to meet the demands of its customerswhile dealing with the new product? Will shipment dates be met?10. Re-evaluate profits and losses. Can the manufacturing process be made more efficient? Can it bemade less wasteful? Can raw materials be derived from inexpensive renewable resources ratherthan virgin ones? How can the product’s energy needs be reduced?11. Review the entire project. Take corrective actions as needed. Ensure every employee ordepartment remains involved. Then determine if manufacturing the product is viable. If it is,continue to improve and refine every stage of production while the sales/marketing campaignbegins.12. Monitor and evaluate all processes – including sales progress. Is everything on track? Do anyproblems exist? What is being done to rectify any mishaps?Product Accessibility (Getting the Word Out): Push versus Pull StrategiesGenerally speaking, there are two ways manufacturers get their products to the marketplace. Thefirst is called a push strategy. A push strategy concentrates on ‘pushing’ a product through commondistribution channels until it’s made available to the public. In other words, the product is pitched towholesalers or retailers who then push the product onto customers. The down-side to this strategy isthat most retailers have limited shelf space in their stores and will probably not want to experimentwith an untested product. Incentives may therefore have to be offered to persuade retailers to get onboard.A pull strategy involves advertising directly at consumers in the hope that they’ll ask for it at theplaces they shop. Retailers then have little choice but to provide what customers demand. Small retailoperators should be on the lookout for manufacturers that use a pull strategy with their products.This makes it possible to ‘ride the wave’ of advertising done at someone else’s expense. (See Chapter18 for suggestions on how these two strategies can be applied in a small business.)For Retailers: Choosing the Best Products to SellGranted it’s difficult, if not impossible, for a retail business that sells hundreds (or thousands) ofproducts to conduct in-depth research on all the items it sells. The amount of money a product coststo sell is therefore a good way to determine the amount of research that should be conducted. Sincebig-ticket items require more capital investment, entrepreneurs should be certain that sufficient179© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManufacturing New Products and Services — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessdemand exists before investing in an expensive new product line. Conversely, products with few costs,or those that are guaranteed by a supplier, can be safely tested through trial and error (see Chapters 5and 6).If your business is considering offering a new product, consider the following factors before makinga purchase:- Promotion Costs include advertising expenses, the distribution of samples, publicdemonstrations, updating the company website, and so on. Without some form of promotionalsupport any product, no matter how wonderful, can end up sitting, unsold, on a rack or shelf.Obviously, every business strives to reduce its expenses, but one expense that should never becut is advertising. As a rule, if a business can’t afford to advertise a product then it can’t afford tostock the product.- Distribution Channels. Will the new product use the same distribution channels your businesscurrently utilizes (i.e.: the same sales people, the same delivery method and schedule, the samestorage system, and so on)? Any changes that have to be made may mean additional expensesand a lower profit margin.- Capacity. If the product proves to be successful, can your business cope? Can you ensure thatstocks will remain plentiful? Or will you have to turn away disappointed customers?- Consumables. Selling goods that customers must replace on a regular basis is an excellent way tofacilitate long-term success. How long is the new product designed to last before customers seeka replacement?- Demographics (and Demand). Who buys the product? Who actually uses it? Are there enoughbuyers and users in your area to justify investing in a new product line? This can be difficult todetermine if the purchasers of the product are not the same as the users. For example, ifchildren use the product you’ll need to know if parents can afford it as well as if the number ofchildren in your area is increasing or decreasing.- Timing. Being in the right place at the right time with the right merchandise is a fundamental ofbusiness success. Businesses that order new products should set up a solid customer supportbase before the novelty, uniqueness, or shelf life of a trendy product wears off.- Profit Margins. Consider the expense of direct costs, indirect costs, and overheads. Is the profitpotential good? For example, if an electronic gadget costs $5 and your business can sell ten perday with a profit margin of 60 cents, will a $6 total profit cover the product’s share of expenses?- Training. Staff will have to be aware of the product and its uses before it hits the shelves.Can your business provide adequate employee training?Stocking New Products: Determining if a Good Decision Has Been MadeThe following suggestions can help determine if a change should be made after a new product hasbeen put into play. Keep in mind that it is possible to have a spectacular finish after a bad start ifyou’re willing to admit to mistakes and correct them.- Examine daily cash register receipts. Cash registers can be easily programmed to keep tabs on theamount and type of products sold. Use this information to determine if the product is sellingwell. If not, find out why. Valuable shelf space should not contain unprofitable products.- Ask customers for feedback. Don’t second guess what customers think. Maintaining goodcommunication with paying customers may reveal complimentary products that can be sold orimproved ways to sell what is already on sale.- Take advantage of posters, display units, and other promotional materials offered by suppliers andmanufacturers. These items are professional looking (which adds credibility and pizzazz) and mayprovide that extra bit of attention new products need to generate sales.- Ask suppliers, manufacturers, and/or distributors of your products for information on improving sales.180© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgManufacturing New Products and Services — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessProfessional suggestions, based on years of experience and research, can prove invaluable.- Always strive to maintain good relations with suppliers/providers. This includes paying bills on time,treating sales representatives with respect, and keeping communication channels open. (seeChapter 8)Advice from the Pros- Make certain that the product or service you want to sell is something your customers want tobuy.- Consider seeking advice from an experienced professional(s) before manufacturing a newproduct. The money spent on getting things right the first time may be far less than that whichis wasted on mistakes.- For manufacturing businesses, ensure that a reliable labor pool is available from which a newproduct can be produced. In some countries or regions, finding people who will perform bothmenial and skilled work is becoming increasingly difficult. Solve this problem before gettingstarted.- By reducing menial tasks with automated machines, a small manufacturing business can savemoney and pay higher wages, which can help retain a skilled workforce.- If your business is having difficulty trying to show that your products are unique and special,consider making the products more special by offering price reductions, coupons, discounts, andso on.- Never underestimate the importance of the ‘Seven P’s of Marketing’ in product promotions. (SeeChapter 24).181© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgExpanding into a foreign market is not a panacea. Selling products in a foreign country can bemisleadingly similar to expanding into a new market at home, yet they are not the same. The risks andpreparation involved, for example, are far greater, which can render foreign trade unfeasible whencompared against potential profits. And a company struggling to survive at home that is looking toconquer overseas markets as a remedy is unlikely to be able to take on and beat experienced overseascompetitors. This is because the risks involved in doing business in a foreign country include:- Bureaucracy,- Corruption,- Unstable governments and markets,- High foreign country debt and/or inflation,- High unemployment (which can lower a nation’s ability to buy your products),- Exchange rate volatility,- Foreign government entry requirements (which can include the degree of business control orownership allocated to foreigners; hiring and firing policies; the percentage of the business’soutput allowed to be exported; and the amount of profits that can be taken from the country),- Marketing mix adaptations (e.g.: product modifications; differences in production methods orquality requirements; distribution channel differences; and advertising differences),- War or regional conflicts, and,- Terrorism, kidnapping, and hostage-taking (Mexico, for example, averages around 8,000abductions per year, a number that includes the taking of executives from foreign companies).Why Go International?With so many problems and challenges involved with doing business in foreign countries theobvious question is why go abroad in the first place? The main reasons include:- Greater profit potential (new markets).- Better raw material access (being closer to raw materials can lead to lower production costs).- Financial capital opportunities (having increased access to financial resources or financialincentives).- Lower labor costs.- Larger labor pools.Chapter 34Expanding into Foreign MarketsHe who is different from me does not impoverishme – he enriches me. No man should seek to hearhis own echo, or find his own reflection…Antoine de Saint-ExuperyThere is nothing so easy to learn as experienceand nothing so hard to applyJosh Billings182© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgExpanding into Foreign Markets — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessBefore Going AbroadDoing business in another country requires a market-led approach (see www.tradecompas.com).Studies show that the reason why so many businesses fail when venturing overseas is because theydidn’t check to see if the market is viable. Apparently, a large proportion of sales from foreign buyersare nothing more than one-time-only orders. This situation is described as ‘passive exporting’ andshould not be associated with long-term customer interest. Therefore, before making a leap into aforeign market, the following questions need addressing:- Can you learn the preferences and buying behavior of customers in the foreign market?- Can your business offer competitively attractive products?- Will you be able to adapt to other business cultures and deal with foreign nationals?- Do you, or your employees, have international experience?- Have you considered the impact of foreign regulations, standards, and political environments?- Can your bank and financial department handle foreign currency transactions?Classifying Your ProductBefore a product (or service) can be sold in another country its classification must be determined.This not only helps sell the product it also helps determine what, if any, tariffs apply. In the UnitedStates, most products and services are classified under the North American Industry ClassificationSystem (NAICS) or the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system (www.census.gov). In Europe, theClassification of Products by Activity (CPA) is used. In other countries, businesses and products areclassified under the Standard International Trade Classification system (SITC) or the HarmonizedCommodity Description and Coding System (also known as the Harmonized System) (www.cbsa.gc.ca/general/publications/hcdcs-e.html).Getting HelpDon’t go it alone in another country. To help guide your way through the complexities ofinternational trading, contact the following agencies (most of which offer free services) for advicebefore you take the plunge:- Local or State Governments. Most large cities (or regions) have an export office or internationaltrading office, a department of industry, a department of commerce, a department of economicdevelopment, or a similar trade department. Check the Internet or a local phone book from thearea. Local trade centers and port authorities provide additional information avenues.- Federal Governments. Every country has a centralized department of trade or commerce thatprovides trading information and advice to both big and small businesses. Some of thesedepartments are split into sections that specialize in specific regions of the world. For example,in the USA contact the Trade Information Center (www.trade.gov) or the Small Business Foundationof America for information regarding shipping goods to, or doing business in, another country.- Foreign Governments. Foreign embassies and consulates are excellent sources of informationregarding the how, why, when, and where of trading with another country. Most embassies orconsulates employ economic development officers whose job is to assist companies that want todo business in their home nations. Check the Internet for details. Additional sources for tradeinformation include international trade groups between countries (such as the British-PolishChamber of Commerce, the Belgian-American Chamber of Commerce, etc...). Many of thesegroups are listed in the Federation of International Trade Associations (www.fita.org)..Establishing Entry ModeOnce a business has decided that it’s safe and reasonable to venture into a foreign market threechoices exist:183© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgExpanding into Foreign Markets — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business1. ExportingThe simplest way for a business to begin selling overseas is to ship products directly to a retailer orintermediary in another country. This method does not require an overseas sales force. Foreignretailers and intermediaries bring regional know-how and skills with their jobs, thereby ensuring, atleast in theory, that fewer mistakes are made. Types of export services that exist for small-businessesinclude:- Commissioned agents or sales representatives. Professional agents act as brokers in finding buyersand selling products (usually on a commission basis). Keep in mind, however, that these folksusually don’t collect shipments from customs, fill out bureaucratic paperwork, or undertakeproduct orders.- Export management companies usually work on a commission basis while acting like an extensionof the business they represent. This means that they’ll represent a product (and, perhaps, theproducts of other companies) as well as take care of the entire export/entry process. Servicesoften include giving advice on legalities, handling logistics (invoices, insurance, customs,documentation…), checking distribution channels, arranging finance, conducting marketresearch, and doing advertising and marketing. Keep in mind, however, that as with any exportservice, if an export management company takes title to a product (i.e.: assumes responsibilityfor it while it’s overseas) it may mark up the price as part of its compensation package. Becertain your price estimates (especially when conducting initial market research) take this intoconsideration.- Export trade companies work much like export management companies in that they handleorders, shipments, and invoices - thereby exerting some control over the cost and service qualityof a product. Keep in mind, however, that most export trade companies will not performmarketing or advertising.2. Joint VenturingAnother mode of product entry is called joint venturing, which involves joining with a foreigncompany to produce or market a product. Types of joint venturing include:- Licensing (Franchising). For a fee or royalty, a foreign company (the licensee) buys the right to usea company’s manufacturing processes, trademarks, patents, trade secrets, or other item of value.Coca-Cola operates in this way. McDonald’s is probably the best known example. Licensing (orfranchising) greatly reduces the risk of starting from scratch. Unfortunately, when the licenseruns out, the licensing business may find that it has created a competitor.- Contract Manufacturing. When a business contracts with a foreign manufacturer to produce aproduct the result is called contract manufacturing. This practice reduces financial risk and mayset the stage for the forming of a later partnership with the manufacturer (it can also involvebuying out the manufacturer altogether). The down side is that by handing over manufacturingresponsibilities to another business some control over manufacturing processes will be lost -which can translate into lower quality.- Management Contracting is the term used to describe the practice of a company supplyingmanagement know-how to a foreign company. Many big hotel chains, including Hilton Hotels,use this strategy. Since good managers are a scarce commodity, however, it may be wise to keepyours at home.- Joint Ownership is when a company joins forces with foreign investors to create a local businessin which each shares ownership and control. This may be necessary for economic or politicalreasons. For example, sometimes, foreign governments require joint ownership as a conditionfor entry. Keep in mind that conflicts can and do arise over management, investment,marketing, and other policies when different owners are involved in a project.184© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgExpanding into Foreign Markets — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business3. Direct InvestmentDirect investment involves entering a foreign market by developing foreign-based assembly ormanufacturing sites. This is usually the route taken after a significant amount of experience inexporting has been gained and the market is seen as stable and growing. Most of the disadvantages ofsetting up a company or factory in another country revolve around the out-of-country risk factorsdescribed at the beginning of this chapter. Advantages can include low labor or raw material costs;incentives from foreign governments; freight savings; the improving of the company’s image throughjob creation; the forming of relationships with foreign governments, suppliers, distributors andcustomers; and greater control over investment and manufacturing/marketing policies.Developing an Overseas Strategic Marketing PlanVery few products succeed with a ‘one size fits all’ marketing strategy. To maximize sales overseas,foreign market conditions must be thoroughly understood, the marketing mix must be adapted tolocal conditions, and cultural sensitivities may need to be addressed. Only then can a decision bemade as to whether or not marketing efforts should be standardized or adapted.1. Standardized Marketing Mix. This is the cheapest method of international marketing.Standardized approaches use the same product, advertising, distribution channels, and otherelements of the marketing mix in all international markets. Before following a standardizedroute, however the following issues must be considered:- The identification of similar needs and preferences. Every national culture has its differences. Thatbeing said, the wants and needs of customers can be identical. Learn the culture andidiosyncrasies of the region where you wish to do business before making a mistake trying to beall things to all people.- Consumer mobility. An increasing number of people travel globally every year. Companies thatsell their products to tourists and travelers must therefore ensure that the products they sellretain their distinctive characteristics (particularly colors and logos) so they can be easilyrecognizable. But see below…- Economies of scale. Most companies prefer a standardized marketing approach because of thecost advantages of managing, producing, shipping, and advertising similar products in bulk(which leads to higher profit margins). Note, however, that a product, its packaging, and evenits size and colors must suit the region and people where it is sold. In some countries, forexample, the color white suggests purity and peace. In others, white represents death. AndAsian countries (as well as some European nations) do not look favorably upon large foodportions, big product packages, and Americanized clothing sizes.- Technological feasibility. When shipping to larger markets, it’s usually a good idea to ensure thatproduction processes are as simple and standardized as possible. This means that screws andbolts fit international tool sizes and basic components can be easily replaced with local varieties.2. A second way to sell overseas is through an Adapted Marketing Mix, which matches thenumerous elements of the marketing mix according to a targeted market. Since customers varyaccording to geography, demographics, economics, and cultural characteristics, the idea is tomatch local idiosyncrasies with the uniqueness of a product. Not doing so can lead to problems.For example, in the 1980’s, German and American machine tool manufacturers saw theircustomer numbers decline because they refused to adapt to changing customer needs – aconcept known as ‘cultural arrogance’ or ‘self reference criterion’ (i.e.: selling a product to foreignersexactly the same way the product is sold at home). Making and marketing a product differentlyfor different markets obviously carries more costs, but by targeting a specific group and cateringto its distinct needs a product can become more appealing. Adapted marketing mix issuesinclude:- Understanding diversity. Knowing the differences (cultural or otherwise) practiced in the region185© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgExpanding into Foreign Markets — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesswhere you wish to do business and formulating a plan to capitalize on those differences.- Product adaptation. Changing a product to meet local conditions. For example, several computercompanies make 20 different computer keyboards to suit different language markets.- Product Invention is the process of creating something new or innovating something already inexistence to better suit a foreign market.Advice from the Pros- Relationships are everything in business – particularly those that sell products overseas andmust rely on the trust, integrity, and skills of an individual who is perhaps thousands of milesaway and who cannot be easily supervised. Work on building solid relationships before makingdoing business in a foreign country.- If you’re looking to expand, look into exporting. Once you start down the exporting road (anddevelop a knack for it) the opportunities are limitless.- Many governments are keen to encourage small businesses to export in order to lower balanceof-trade deficits (this is when more imports come in to a country than exports go out). Checkyour nation’s department of trade or commerce for grants or other incentives that can help yourbusiness get started.- Don’t forget to fully cover your insurance needs before venturing into another country.186© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgFew subjects, it seems, are as polarizing or provocative as those that attempt to explain thecondition of the Earth’s present situation. To some people our planet appears to be undergoing drasticchanges. To others this is either not true or no big deal. Regardless of which side you’re on, legendaryinvestor Warren Buffet seems to nail the issue on the head when he says that this, ‘…is a problem thatonce it manifests itself it’s a little too late to do something about. You really have to build the arkbefore the rain comes in this case’ (Guerrera, 2007). What Mr. Buffet is referring to are the effects oframpant, unchecked resource-use, waste, pollution, and other forms of environmental degradation, afew of which are briefly mentioned in this chapter.First, the Good News: Sustainability and the Circular EconomyOf the many solutions designed to tackle resource-depletion, waste accumulation, pollution andother contributory issues, two of the most basic are sustainability (often defined as ‘the capacity tocontinue into the long-term’) and circular economics, which is defined as ‘repeatedly re-usingresource materials and their molecules in a regenerative system to avoid the need for replacementresources’ (Geissdoerfer, Savaget, et al, 2016). Waste elimination and waste prevention are integral tothese concepts when they are applied in business.Examples include a subsidiary of the DuPont corporation, which achieved a goal of zero-waste tolandfill, generated $2.2-billion in new revenue, and reduced production costs by over$400,000.  Additional examples include General Electric, which reduced its annual costs by$100-million, generated an increase of $17-billion in yearly revenues, and eliminated 30% of itsgreenhouse gas emissions in the process.  And the world’s largest manufacturer of carpet tiles(Interface) which pledged to eliminate waste and use its old products to make new products; during thefirst five years of its commitment to sustainability, Interface tripled its revenues, doubled its profits,and doubled employment while watching its stock price increase 550%.  Keep in mind that resultssuch as these are by no means limited to big business. However, before delving further into the resultsthat astute businesses are achieving, let’s briefly examine the situations that are prompting them.The Bad News… Starting with Population IncreasesIn 1950, the number of people on Earth amounted to around two billion. Today the number is6.5-billion. By 2050 this will increase to somewhere between eight and ten billion (currently, 10,000people are born every hour). To add to this, the world is becoming more affluent (which means peopleare consuming more) and also living longer (which results in even more consumption). In otherwords, an unprecedented and growing number of people are competing for the world’s limitedresources. Overpopulation and resource consumption not only leads to a deterioration of the Earth, itChapter 35Sustainability: The New FrontierWhat I stand for is what I stand on.Wendell BerryThe hottest spot in Hell is reserved forthose who in time of crisis remain neutralDante187© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessalso generates an escalation of waste and toxins poured into the air, ground, and water. Traditionally,people have always been able to move to new habitats when old locations became unsuitable becauseof waste build-up or resource depletion, however, today there are fewer such places to which peoplecan move. Modern civilization now generates three times more garbage than it did in 1960. Onaverage, most people in the USA generate 4.4 pounds (2 kilos) of garbage per day, an amount that isprojected to rise to 4.8 pounds (2.2 kilos) in the near future. And the number of developing countriesthat want to grow their economies to the same level enjoyed by those in the West (which they haveevery right to do) makes this scenario even more problematic.Carbon DioxideThe Earth’s atmosphere contains 40% more carbon dioxide today than it did at the start of theindustrial age. This is not guesswork. Although carbon dioxide is odorless, tasteless, and invisible(which makes it as invidious as it is easy to ignore), its levels can be accurately measured by examiningisotopes trapped in ice deposits that have been forming in the arctic for over 650,000 thousand years.Through the study of these deposits it has been revealed that in as little as 60-years carbon dioxidelevels have increased far above that of any other time period. Perhaps more troubling is thattemperature increases, which can also be accurately measured from ice deposits, have risenproportionately. Today, over 90% of scientists looking into this matter (on an independent basis)agree that the two are related and that human activity is responsible for the current increase of carbondioxide and other greenhouse gases. Most of these same scientists also agree that the buildup ofcarbon dioxide is a result of the following five culprits:- Electricity production,- Heating,- Transportation,- Agriculture, and,- Deforestation and Forest DegradationAfter looking into the climate change issue in 2006, the UK government concluded that every tonof carbon dioxide created causes around $120 of economic damage and that the average personproduces nine tons of CO2 per year through energy consumption alone. To put this into perspective,property damage caused by natural disasters is rising an average of 10% per year due to shifts inweather patterns – a fact that underscores a report by the Lloyd’s of London insurance company, whichstates that unless every insurance company starts to make better use of global warming predictionsthe entire industry could collapse (Vencat, 2007). In some parts of the world whole regions and lakesare drying up while in other areas catastrophic flooding is increasing. Just as unsettling, areas withonce steady climates are experiencing drastic changes in temperature. One of the more in-depthweather studies conducted revealed that the length of heat waves in Europe has doubled and theirfrequency has nearly tripled (Begley, 2007). This is not to be taken lightly, especially when one takesinto account that heat waves, on average (particularly in developed countries), kill more people thanany other form of natural disaster. Unfortunately, since the victims are usually poor and there’s nocatastrophic property damage for the media to fixate upon, heat waves don’t generate the sameattention as floods, earthquakes, and storms (Carlson, 2006). Meanwhile, the frequency of tornadoeshas doubled compared to the last century and snowpack, whose water is crucial to both cities andfarms, is diminishing. These changes have already damaged several economies dependent onagriculture and have resulted in higher food prices, higher fuel costs, and higher insurance premiums.Between 1981 and 2002, for example, increasing cereal crop losses resulting from higher temperaturesamounted to $5-billion (Walsh, 2007) and in 2007 Canada (the world’s second biggest wheatproducer) recorded its smallest harvest ever as a result of drought. Across the Atlantic, Europeanwheat production fell by 40% due to flooding rains the same year. Further north, ice caps and glaciersare melting at an unprecedented pace and the oceans are both rising and becoming more acidic (due to188© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessthe absorption of CO2). Equally as worrying, open water was recently discovered at the North Pole forthe very first time – a sign that warming trends could discharge tons of carbon and methane gasfrozen in northern permafrost regions as well as the freezing sludge at the bottom of both poles(methane is 20-times more potent than carbon dioxide and nearly a third of the world’s supply ofthese gases are trapped in permafrost soil).Agriculture WoesObviously, an increasing human population means that food production must also increase incoordination with action to eliminate food waste. Yet according to agriculture researchers, one-thirdof the world’s croplands are losing topsoil at a rate that nature can’t replace (Hawken, et al, 1999). As aresult, too much commercial agriculture, heavily dependent on chemicals, fertilizers, and pesticides, iseither stagnating or experiencing diminishing returns. Too many farmed areas are steadily requiringmore input and effort to maintain their crop yields, which means more fertilizers and pesticides arebeing dumped onto soil that has, in many cases, been burned into a substance that resembles littlemore than dust clumps. The chemicals being used then wash away into nearby streams and rivers.For example, off the Louisiana coast an area 7,000 square miles in diameter (11,265 sq. kilometers) isnow completely dead due to the run off of nitrates that seep into the Mississippi River fromfarmlands. Meanwhile, to offset diminishing returns, more forests are being cleared to create largercrop fields and grazing land (the latter of which already takes up a quarter of the world’s land). Add tothis the fact that half of the world’s range lands have deteriorated into desert, water tables have beenfalling for years, and the world’s 18 major oceanic fisheries have either reached or exceeded maximumsustainable yields (Hart, 2005) and deterioration in food production could become even moreproblematic.The livestock industry appears to be doing no better. Consider the 1,000 or more cattle penned inat the average factory farm and note that each beef cow (which requires 100 pounds of feed for everyten pounds [4.5 kilos] of beef it produces) generates the same amount of feces and urine as 16 adulthumans. Moreover, animal waste tends to be 25 to 100 times more concentrated than human wasteand is laden with antibiotics and artificial hormones to speed the growth of livestock - a practicewidely believed to contribute to resistant strains of bacteria. The US 1997 Census of Agriculturereported that the amount of animal waste produced by hogs, cattle, poultry, and sheep amounts to220-billion gallons (833-billion liters) per year, enough to fill 330,000 Olympic-sized swimming poolsand which is too much for farmers to use on their fields as fertilizer without killing their crops(Knoblauch, 2007). So where is the excess waste put? Usually into specially created ‘sewage lagoons’,which can be an accident waiting to happen. In 1995, for example, an eight-acre pig-waste lagoon inNorth Carolina broke its banks and spilled millions of gallons of waste into a nearby river killing tenmillion fish and closing down more than 300,000 acres of wetlands to shell fishing.Disease, Toxins, and Health ProblemsRecently, the World Health Organization concluded that because of our waste-producing lifestyles,our ability to travel, and climate change, infectious diseases are spreading faster than at any other timein history. For example, 39 new diseases (e.g.: SARS, Lyme disease, Ebola virus, Lassa fever, etc), mostof which are life-threatening, have emerged onto the world stage since 1967. And a 2001 survey ofnearly 600 children found that perfluorooctanoic acid – a substance found in food wrap, Teflon, andstain-resistant fabric coatings – is swirling in the blood of 96% of the children it sampled (Zandonella,2005). This substance is one of dozens of toxins now found as a matter of course in most humanbodies (Kamrin, 2003). Traces of arsenic, mercury, and benzene also show up regularly alongsideheavy metal compounds such as lead, cadmium, zinc, chromium, and copper. In river sediments andestuaries these substances are equally as ubiquitous. Increasing levels of polycyclic aromatichydrocarbons (PAH’s), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB’s), and pesticides merely add to the problem(each of which can take hundreds of years to degrade) (EPA, 2006). Residues from the billions of189© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessdoses of prescription drugs humans consume are also being found along shorelines and in wetlands.Swallowed to combat cancer, pain, depression, and other ailments, most medications do not disappearinto patients or animals where they harmlessly disappear. Instead, they work their way into theenvironment (Johns Hopkins University, 2002). Researchers in Canada, for example, found a dozendifferent toxic drugs in water samples taken from the St. Lawrence River in Quebec, while across theborder a vast array of pharmaceuticals (including antibiotics, anti-convulsants, mood stabilizers, andsex hormones) have been found in the drinking water supplies of 41-million Americans (AssociatedPress, 2008).Life-threatening health dangers appear to be on the rise for plant and animal life as well (Pappas2016 & Fox-Skelly, 2017). Some scientists believe there may be a link between an upsurge in animalviruses that used to be considered rare (e.g.: bird flu) and changes in global temperatures. Otherdiseases and parasites are ravaging trout stocks in Europe, decimating shellfish, and killing off plantspecies (Margolis, 2006). Further studies have revealed that chytridomycosis (a waterborne fungus) iswiping out the world’s frog population - a worrying sign that the natural order of the world may bechanging – and in North America alone, 25% to 35% of the continent’s honeybees have disappeared(honeybees pollinate 30% of America’s food crop and account for over $15-billion of its economy).One explanation as to why so many species are suffering or disappearing – apart from the stressinduced by chemicals, pollution, and climate change - is that environmental shifts are causing micropredators to flourish faster than the species they prey upon can evolve natural defense mechanisms.As one environmentalist told me, ‘We seem to forget that our actions, particularly when duplicatedhundreds of millions of times, result in big consequences – and these consequences often appearquicker than we anticipate.’ A few years ago, for example, it was predicted that one third of the world’spopulation would lack access to clean water by the year 2025. That prediction came true 20years early.Economic TroublesAs early as 30-years ago it was deduced that an industrial system with open linear material flows(one that takes in materials and energy, creates products, and then throws most of what it createsaway) probably cannot continue indefinitely (Frosch, 1997). Indeed, there is strong evidence tosuggest that the $40-trillion world economy, which is based on a linear system, is in trouble (Palley,2006). One aspect of the problem is that the current job market cannot grow fast enough to provideopportunities for the tens of millions of young people who wish to join the labor force every year – asituation that many believe will continue to contribute to violence and terrorism. In the meantime,the gap between rich and poor is widening at an alarming rate. Since 1960, the world’s wealthiestindividuals have increased their control over global production by 15% (the rich currently control 85%of global GDP) while the poorest have lost more than half of the 2.3% share they once had. Today,large multi-national corporations account for a quarter of the world’s global economic activity whileemploying less than 1% of its labor force. Moreover, most of the world’s profits are produced byfocusing on only the top third of the global economic pyramid (i.e.: the richest consumers) leavingtwo-thirds of humanity out of the world’s economic loop (Hart, 2005).OpportunitiesAccording to Sir Nicholas Stern, former head of the UK government’s Economics Service, the costs oftaking action are much smaller than the costs of business-as-usual by a factor of between 5 and 20. Inother words, companies that don’t act now will pay dearly later because, it is far better to take actionnow than to take the more costly route and re-design, re-tool, and re-think later. The IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change (IPCC), set up under the auspices of the United Nations, concluded thatcollectively, the cost of reducing climate change will amount to between .12% and .3% of global GDP(IPCC, 2007). The challenge is that everyone must get involved. These changes include: (1) havingbusinesses convert to efficient, sustainable, less wasteful practices, and, (2) reducing the ever-widening190© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businessdistance between industry and humanity (the wasting of people) by bringing into the fold the overfour billion people on earth whose needs are currently not being met.Countless opportunities, substantial cost savings, and greater profits lie in wait for businesseswilling and able to take corrective action. Unfortunately, the basis behind many of the argumentsbehind inaction is that change is always and only an expense. In contrast, ‘bottom-up’ entrepreneurialmodels take into account the added savings (and potential earnings) that competition, new practices,and new technologies can produce. For example, before the passage of the American Clean Air ActAmendments of 1990, ‘top down’ theorists predicted that meeting sulfur emission reduction targetswould cost businesses $1,500 (or more) per ton of emissions (DeCanio, 1997). Instead, sulfurallowances traded at less than $100 per ton by 1996 and fell to $66 by 1999. Sulfur emissionssubsequently dropped across the USA by 37% and electricity rates, which were predicted to rise toastronomical heights (power plants are one of the chief creators of sulfur pollution), fell by one-eighth.Ironically, the reason why the worst case scenarios never materialized was because by making wastemore expensive the onus was put on power companies to become more efficient, more competitive,and more innovative – which they did.To be sure, some businesses and investors will ignore the evidence. Yet pharmaceutical companiesare reportedly already gearing up to profit from the resulting outbreak of diseases once kept in checkby cooler temperatures. Shipping companies are also getting in on the act by exploring new ice-freeroutes through the arctic while farming interests are shifting north into the once barren areas ofSiberia, Canada, and Alaska (Vencat, 2007). Additionally, sustainable energy companies are poppingup like mushrooms after a spring rain, cosmetics companies are testing new products that look betterunder energy-efficient lighting, and other businesses have been breaking sales records by makingproducts more efficient and more efficiently. Refurbished products and materials are a case in point(remanufacturing can cost around 60% less than creating products and materials from scratch).General Electric’s (GE) locomotive plant in Erie, Pennsylvania provides an example from the otherend of the cost spectrum. Despite the fact that several of GE’s best customers come from nationswhere the price of local locomotives is 30% cheaper, GE is able to sell its more expensive locomotivesin developing countries because its locomotives are of high quality, they’re more energy efficient, theyemit very low levels of pollutants, and they have an unmatched record of reliability – all of which costsmore. But a combination of lower operating costs, reduced energy needs, and extended product life– as well as less waste – means that GE locomotives are less expensive to operate in the long run asopposed to cheap, energy-consuming alternatives that have a shorter lifespan and require constantrepairs (Friedman, 2007).Businesses that choose not to adapt their products and production processes in similar ways may findthemselves facing increasing legislation that forces them to do so. For example, Australia banned mostenergy-wasting, incandescent light bulbs in 2010 (a move designed to save millions of dollars in energycosts and eliminate tons of CO2 emissions) and both Europe and the USA have adopted similar legislation.More robust legislative examples include the European WEEE directive (Waste Electric and ElectronicEquipment) that took effect on August 2005 (WEEE is designed to mitigate the incineration and dumping ofelectronic waste) and Europe’s RoHS (the Restriction of Hazardous Substances), which went into effect in July2006 (RoHS bans electronic equipment containing certain levels of cadmium, lead, mercury, and other toxicsubstances). Further European efficiency measures include the EUP directive (Energy Using Products) thattook effect in August of 2007 (which requires producers to design and track products according to closedloop waste reduction practices) and the up-and-coming REACH authorization (the directive on Registration,Evaluation, and Authorization of Chemicals), which requires manufacturers to publicly display toxicity dataand to prove that the chemicals used to make products are safe. Foreign companies that wish to dobusiness with the EU will therefore have to change their products and production processes to meet withthese directives or they may find themselves unable to penetrate a vast and profitable market (currently,one third of the world’s electronics are sold in Europe).191© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessAdditional legislative moves, particularly in Germany and Japan, make many manufacturers legallyresponsible for their products after they’re sold to promote reuse, recycling, and remanufacturing - anddozens more countries have initiated legislation to reduce, eliminate, or recycle packaging materials.Even the United States, which for a long time has lagged behind most of the developed world in termsof reducing waste, is taking action at both state and local levels. New York City, for example, has madeit mandatory that all taxis be hybrid vehicles– a move designed to save drivers over $1,000 per monthin fuel costs while reducing tons of greenhouse gases. Few people doubt that more environmentallaws are on the way.Bottom line: governments are now realizing that producing high levels of costly waste andpollutants does not equate with freedom nor is it a basic human right. Even the Securities andExchange Commission (SEC) has been petitioned by representatives of several American states to forcecompanies to reveal the actions they’re taking to prepare for climate change. The belief is thatinvestors should have the opportunity to avoid investing in companies that are ignoring the spiralingcosts of waste and a changing environment.Put another way, businesses that heed the signs and adopt waste elimination and resource-lifeextension in their business model stand a better chance of survival than those that do not.For More InformationThree years after I started the research for this book, I stopped everything in order to write abouthow businesses can change to cope with, and profit from, the above mentioned problems. And there isno doubt that solutions to these problems are leading to superior products, substantial cost savings,increases in profits, better work and workplace quality, and rising employment.For a free copy of the book that resulted from this research (titled: The Sustainable Business), go towww.efmd.org and click on ‘Research’, then click on ‘The Sustainable Business’. The organizationsinvolved in distributing this free book and it related materials (videos, workbooks, syllabus models,etc…) use the following JPEG’s to promote this initiative:It’s not just energy; every process in every work system contains waste, and since waste is definedas ‘not achieving 100% of purchases and investments’, a sustainable business works to eliminate wastein all its forms and prevent it from returning.Fact: Increases in material consumption combined with the world’s finite resource supplies meansthat the ability of industries, businesses, and regions to do more with less is not only a keycompetitive advantage, it will soon be a leading attribute (and indicator) of long-termeconomic successUnderstanding Sustainability A Lesson in WasteAccumulating inefficiencies in a typical industrial pumping systemStart: fuel input 100%Power plant loss 60-70%Transmissionline loss 9-10%Energy output 9-10%Drivetrain &Throttle losses 35%Motor loss 10%Pipe losses 20%Pump losses 25%THIS IS NOT SUSTAINABLE!192© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessEvery successful business sustainability program begins with waste elimination!But please note the following:1. Waste elimination (cost saving and pollution control) on its own isn’t enough because no businesscan survive simply by saving money.2. To succeed, businesses must make money, which is why resource-life extension (circular economics or CE) must also beincorporated.3. With resource-life extension (CE), the smaller “loop” the greater the economic advantage and the more local the jobcreation tends to be.4. Educating managers is not enough: if this information is not made freely available to everyone (i.e: the people who don’t attendconferences and whose employers don’t - or won’t - provide adequate training), it will be much more difficult for businesses tomove toward a sustainable future.If businesses apply basic sustainabilityconcepts to improve their profitability...(waste elimination and resource-life extension)...then almost any region can attract morebusinesses (which creates jobs) withoutneeding more resources or majorinfrastructure expansion.Focus on action instead of discussion and you will get results!Fact:Every successful business sustainability program begins with waste elimination (waste elimination and resource-lifeextension)Waste is defined as:Not achieving 100% of purchases and investments.Examples of waste include: physical waste (garbage), over-buying, pollution, non-optimal resource use,customers that do notreturn, poor employee training, costly systems and processes, wasted time, and countless other expensive scenarios that burdenbusiness and create future problemsSustainability - benefits for infrastructure193© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgSustainability: The New Frontier — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFREE! For Business Schools and Business Training ProgramsIntroductory Videos that Explain Basic Sustainability Concepts!Video 1. What is Sustainability (CIPS and EFMD)Provides an overview of sustainability with a brief history, then introduces basicterminolgy including an introduction to closed-loop economics (the circular economics(the circular economy).Video 3. Applying Sustainability in Business: Two Major Rules (CIPS and EFMD)Describes the functional ‘mechanics’ of sustainability and how they apply in differentsettings including: buildings and work areas, products, and production processes.Video 2. Sustainability and How it Applies in Every Business(CIPS and EFMD)Explores how and why basic sustainability concepts are applicablein every business and industry, not just manufacturing.More informationFree download!Share it with your employees :www.efmd.org/research/the-sustainable-business194© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgOne of the more interesting conclusions I came to when writing this book is that no matter wheresuccessful small businesses are found, the people who operate them often give good advice and speakwith the same voice. Unfortunately, with the failure rate of new businesses as high as 90%, it seemsthat too many beginners choose not to listen. ‘Never have so many people had so much access to somuch knowledge and yet have been so resistant to learning anything,’ says author Tom Nichols,author of The Death of Expertise (2017). He goes on to note that rejecting the advice of those in theknow is just one way that a less experienced individual asserts his or her autonomy. Fueled by‘romantic notions about the wisdom of the common person or the gumption of the self-educatedgenius’, Nichols says that too many people, when confronted with evidence that they are wrong,re-double their efforts to keep their own internal narrative consistent, no matter how clear theindications are that they’re going in the wrong direction.The result (in entrepreneurial terms) is the assumption that what happened to someone else’sbusiness will not happen to mine – a mindset that often boils down to pride, ignorance, or arrogance.Two AnalogiesTo illustrate the process of building a successful business, two analogies were suggested bycontributing entrepreneurs for this book. The first analogy was inspired by a treatise written in thefirst century by Marcus Vitruvius Pollio. Titled De Architectura (On Architecture), Pollio’sgroundbreaking work states that the proper design of buildings is based upon good symmetry andthat symmetry arises from proportion. Proportion (according to De Architectura) consists of ensuringthat smaller units act in unison with the overall structure. In other words, every piece of a functionalbuilding - no matter how small or seemingly insignificant – must support the totality and balance of the entirestructure as a whole. A business is no exception. From the laying of the foundation to its operations, astrong business relies on symbiotic pieces that fit together and work in unison with the business’sintended customer base.Note however, that because customer wants and needs change, the type of business a successfulentrepreneur builds can end up being somewhat different than what was envisioned on paper. Inother words, at some point most successful businesses undertake an evolutionary journey -- whichbrings us to the second analogy. Charles Darwin is often credited with the phrase, ‘survival of thefittest’, but these words are not his. Instead, Darwin put forth the notion that an organism’s survivaldepends upon an ability to adapt to change.Chapter 36Putting It All TogetherAdvice is what we ask for when we alreadyknow the answer, but wish we didn’tErica JongEven if you’re on the right track, you’llget run over if you just sit there.Will Rogers195© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPutting It All Together — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessThe Five Components of a Successful BusinessAfter collecting the wisdom of hundreds of entrepreneurs, it appears that almost all of the piecesthat constitute successful business operations can be placed under five categories:1. Personal Maturity and Growth2. The Ability to Serve Customers3. Good Management4. Results-Producing Marketing and Selling, and,5. Quality Products or MerchandiseIt does not seem to matter how these categories are arranged (they are certainly not arranged abovein order of importance). All five overlap or are inter-linked to such an extent that it would be difficult- if not impossible - to claim that one is more important than another. But keep in mind that theabsence of one category, or a weakness in one, is enough to bring down a business.To be sure, sometimes a weakness in one area can be, in the short-term and under the rightcircumstances, compensated by strength in another area. But only in the short-term. Indeed, that’show beginners and inexperienced entrepreneurs get by. Experienced business owners, however, knowthat they can’t hope to compete in the long-term this way.Put differently, if a person is shipwrecked on a desert island he or she needs food, shelter, andwater. Whichever factor is in the shortest supply limits survival. Having more of one will notcompensate for the lack of another (e.g.: having twice as much food and shelter will not make up for alack of water).As a Canadian shop owner put it, ‘Be patient, work hard, keep your eye on the ball, keep learning,and you’ll eventually get where you want to go. That’s when the real work begins.’In other words, there is no finish line. Following is a consolidated list of the most often-repeatedadvice given by the hundreds of entrepreneurs I spoke with. I can’t think of a better way to concludethis book.Recap: Advice from the Pros (and the country where the advice came from)- Don’t enter a field, industry, or product market that does not interest you. (Belgium)- Don’t think of business as a way to get rich, but rather as a means of enriching yourself. Successflows from passion. (USA)- Don’t be complacent and don’t procrastinate. Success in business demands the taking of risks.(UK and Australia)- Know your product and its industry. Begin with an idea you can handle and keep your servicelevels high. (South Africa)- Try to think about where you and your business will be in five, ten, twenty, or even thirty years.This will help you avoid complacency. (USA)- Believe in yourself. Work hard and keep your promises. (South Africa)- Do a lot of research before taking the plunge. (UK)- Write down your goals and ambitions and use them to stay on track. (Russia)- A good business plan is everything. Take the time to develop a solid one. (Belgium)- Include the cost of loans and other debts in your business forecast. (France)- Be courageous, optimistic, serious, and tenacious. (Belgium)- Never stop developing your skills. Remain alert to environmental changes. (Belgium)- Take the time to relax, unwind, and nurture yourself from time to time. Your business will be allthe better for it. (Germany)196© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPutting It All Together — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Be 100% committed before beginning any business venture. (USA and Australia)- Thoroughly research the demand of your product. Knowing whether demand is low or highhelps reduce risk. (Belarus)- Consider working for someone else in a business or industry in order to gain experience beforetaking a leap into a similar business or industry. (Poland and USA)- Ensure that your idea and its set-up agree with your personality, your sense of risk, your values,and your level of ethics. (Australia)- Start modestly. If you think you need a lot of money to start a business you may be thinking toobig. Don’t grab for the brass ring at one go. Start out small and grow. (Belgium)- If you have a good idea and have thoroughly researched and developed it, dive in – even if theidea seems weird. Just be sure you have an airtight business plan first. (UK)- Understand that being a prosperous business owner can mean working 16 or 18 hours a day.Hard work is the key to resolving most business problems. (Belgium and the UK)- Don’t expect success to happen overnight. Success takes time. (Belarus)- Make certain your name is in some way present in the name of your company (South Africa).- If you are not good with numbers, consider hiring a professional accountant to look over thebooks of an exiting business before you buy it. Hiring the services of a qualified professionalmay be money well spent. (Denmark)- Starting a solid business means starting with enough capital. (Russia)- Qualify for a home equity loan and apply for new credit cards before leaving a full-time job tostart a business. Credit is much more difficult to obtain after you leave a full-time job. (Canada)- Try to keep at least 3-6 months worth of cash on hand (on top of your start-up costs) to helpyou through any unforeseen crisis (Poland).- Prepare for money losses in advance by starting with enough capital from several reliable sourcesrather than just one. (Belarus)- Hire a good accountant. (Ireland)- Pay attention to cash flow and know the difference between profit and cash. (Belgium)- Pay your taxes on time and in full. (Australia)- Try not to commit to huge expenses until your business has enough money coming in to justifythe expenditure (Belgium, USA, and Holland)- Serve customers the way you would like to be served. (UK)- Make sure you offer customers up-to-date and competitive pricing. (Canada)- Look after your customers. They are the ones who put food on your table. (Australia)- If your business is reliant on only a few high-paying customers endeavor to find more. That wayyou won’t be hurt if one or two leave. (Germany)- Never underestimate the personal side of customer relationships. Learn the names of yourcustomers. Wine and dine big clients. Send out birthday cards. Always go the extra mile. (USA)- Train employees so that they can perform several jobs. That way, when someone is sick orunavailable (or a skilled worker is needed in a pinch), a qualified replacement will be on hand.(USA)- Pick your staff very carefully. (Australia)- Take the time to select and train good employees. (Belgium)- When it comes to good employees, training is everything. (from an Irish business owner in Poland)197© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPutting It All Together — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Develop trust in others before giving it outright. (Russia)- Consider offering shares to employees as a means of motivating them. (South Africa)- Maintain a good relationship with employees. Treat them like you would your partners. In anybusiness, commitment and cooperation between owners and operators and employees is of theutmost importance. (Poland)- Hire skilled workers rather than family and friends. (Holland)- Analyze the competition and ensure your business is different in some way. Then put together asolid marketing plan. You may think you have a great service or product, but if no one knowsyour business exists you have nothing. (South Africa)- Make sure your business and its product have a unique attribute or selling point – somethingthat makes them different from what the competition is offering. (Belgium)- Keep in mind that some of the least expensive marketing and selling techniques, which usuallyinvolve face-to-face interaction or the clever use of technology, are often the most effective. (UK)- Teach all your employees how to sell or enroll them in a selling course. The investment youmake will repay itself and then some. (USA)- Never stop analyzing, improving, and practicing your selling techniques. (Holland)- Meetings held at breakfast are usually more productive than those held at any other time of day.(USA)- Pay attention to warning signs. Problems and difficulties rarely spring up out of thin air. If youremain attentive and proactive the road ahead will be less rocky. (Belarus)- Concentrate on benefits and solutions rather than negativity and problems. (Belgium)- Don’t go it alone. Just because a business is yours doesn’t mean that you know everything.(France)- Don’t rush to conclusions or judgments when making decisions. Estimate your abilitiesrealistically. (USA)- Focus on the goals of your business and avoid distractions. Equally, don’t spread out to thinly bytrying to do or be more than you can manage. Grow sensibly. (Belarus)- Surround yourself with talented and knowledgeable people – then listen to them. (Belgium)- Learn to rely on skills and experience rather than favorable circumstances. (Russia)- Learn from your mistakes. Don’t give up. When you fall (which you will at some point), get up,brush yourself off, and try again. (Belarus)- Never skimp on quality. (Belgium)- Be strategic instead of tactical. Develop and test your ideas so that your capital is used wisely.(Australia)- Always think in the long-term. (USA)- Don’t skimp, don’t rush, don’t cut corners and don’t try to do everything yourself. If you do anyof these you’re just cheating yourself. (Canada)- Buy the best equipment and materials that your business can afford. You’ll save money in thelong run. (Germany)- Use your time wisely. You can always make more money, but you can never make more time.(Denmark)198© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPutting It All Together — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business- Regularly keep track of the money-makers and the money losers in your business. If you can’tsqueeze cash from the money losers, get rid of them. (Germany)- Invest in new technologies instead of spending too much time and money dealing with old ones.(France and Poland)- Practice makes perfect, but if you need too much practice consider hiring a professional. (USAand Canada)- In business there are no victims, only volunteers. (USA)- As you grow, don’t be afraid to hire people with more experience and don’t avoid letting go ofthose who can’t cope. Jon Huntsman, who started what became a billion-dollar business (theHuntsman Corp.) from scratch, says that it takes a different type of individual to run a companyat different stages. As he took his company from zero sales to the $100-million mark, hereplaced many people from his original team because they couldn’t handle the pressure. At thebillion-dollar mark he had to do the same thing again for the same reasons (Bisoux, 2005). (USA)- In business, never think that you’re finished – in reality, you’ve only just begun. (Holland)199© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgPrefaceOECD (Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development), OECD SME andEntrepreneurship Outlook, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2016.Chapter 1 (Do You Have What It Takes?)Drucker, P.F., ‘Leadership: More Doing than Dash’, The Wall Street Journal, Jan 6, 1988, pp. 16.Druckman, Amanda, ‘Think You’re Smart? Clinical Causes of Professional Incompetence’, PsychologyToday, May 2000, pg. 114.Fiedler, F.E., ‘Time Based Measures of Leadership Experience and Organizational Performance’,Leadership Quarterly, Spring 1992, pp. 5 - 8.Green Jim, Starting Your Own Business, How to Books, Oxford, 2003.Hersey, P., & Blanchard, K.H., Management of Organizational Behavior, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs(NJ), 1988.Hilton, Conrad, Be My Guest, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1984.Kirkpatrick, S.A., & Locke, E.A., ‘Leadership: Do Traits Matter?’, Academy of Management Executive,vol. 5, May 1991, pp. 48 - 54.Kotter, J.P., ‘What Effective General Managers Really Do’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 60, Nov-Dec1974, pp.156 - 161.Petrilla, Molly, ‘Millenialrepeurs are Starting More Businesses, Targeting Higher Profits’, Fortune(online), 20, Feb 2016.Scott, Jonathan T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, NY, 2005.Shane, Scott, The Illusions of Entrepreneurship: The Costly Myths that Entrepreneurs, Investors, and PolicyMakers Live By, Yale University Press, 2010.Vroom, V.H., & Jago, A.G., The New Leadership, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs (NJ), 1988.Chapter 2 (Starting a Business or Introducing a New Product)Becket, Michael, The Daily Telegraph Small Business Guide to Starting Your Own Business, MacMillan,London, 2003.Burley, James & Steven, Greg, ‘Three Thousand Raw Ideas Equals One Commercial Success’, ResearchTechnology Management, May-June 1997, pg. 16-27.Pascal, Richard, Managing on the Edge, Penguin Books, New York, 1991.Reese, Jennifer, ‘Getting Hot Ideas From Customers’, Fortune, 18 May 1992, pp. 86-87.World Bank Group (International Finance Corporation), Doing Business in 2004: UnderstandingRegulation.Chapter 3 (Finding a Good Product Idea)Boykin, Sam, ‘The Sweet Stink of Success’, www.salon.com, 18, January 2006.Dess, Gregory, & Miller, Alex, Strategic Management, McGraw-Hill, 1993.Edwards, Paul and Sarah, Best Home Businesses for the 21st Century, Penguin Putnam, NY, 1999.Farrow, Boyd, ‘Inherit the Wind’, CNBC European Business, January/February 2007, pg. 15.Gale, Linda, Discover What You’re Best At, Fireside Books, NY, 1990.Ghent, Steve, ‘Sweden Opens First Mall for Repaired and Recycled Goods’, Goodnewsnetwork.org, April4, 2017.Hart, Stuart, Capitalism at the Crossroads, Wharton School Publishing (Pearson Education), NewJersey, 2005.Hoover, Gary, Hoover’s Handbook of American Business, The Reference Press, 1995.Kennedy, Dan S., How To Succeed in Business by Breaking All the Rules, Dutton (Penguin), NY, 1997.Bibliography200© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessLonier, Teri, Working Solo, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1998Nemko, Marty, & Edwards, Paul and Sarah, Cool Careers for Dummies, IDG Books, CA, 2001.Richardson, D. & Ramirez, R. & Haq, M., Grameen Telecom’s Village Phone Programme in RuralBangladesh, Guelph, Ontario: TeleCommons Development Group, 2000 (as reported by Hart, StuartL., Capitalism at the Crossroads, Wharton School Publishing (Pearson Education, New Jersey), 2005.)Thompson, Arthur & Strickland, A.J., Strategic Management Concepts and Cases, Irwin, 1993.Chapter 4 (Part-Time Businesses, Full-Time Businesses, Franchises, Businesses for Sale…)Halloran, James, The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Starting a Successful Business, McGraw Hill, 1992.Norman, Jan, What No One Ever Tells You About Starting Your Own Business, Upstart Publishing,Chicago, 1999.Pile, Stephen, The Book of Heroic Failures, Futura, London, 1980.Chapter 5 & 6 (Research)Blankenship, Albert & Breen, George & Dutka, Alan, State of the Art Marketing, NTC Books, Chicago,1998.The Economist, Poland (a 15 page special report), pp. 5-20, Oct. 27th – Nov. 2nd 2001.Grove, Jack, ‘Shrinking Enrollment in Poland’, Times Higher Education, March 6, 2014.Hague, Paul & Jackson, Peter, Market Research: A Guide to Planning Methodology and Evaluation, KoganPage, London, 2002.‘How to Conduct Market Research’, www.ehow.com, 2005.‘Marketing Research’, The United States Small Business Administration, www.sba.gov, 2005.McQuarrie, Edward, F., The Market Research Toolbox: A Concise Guide for Beginners, Sage PublicationsLtd., London, 2006.Peters, Tom & Waterman, R.H., In Search of Excellence: Lessons from America’s Best Run Companies,Harper & Row, New York, 1983.‘Questionnaire Design: General Considerations’, www.statpac.com, 2006.Chapter 7 (Choosing a Location)Arduser, Lora, Restaurant Site Location: Finding, Negotiating and Securing the Best Food Service Site forMaximum Profit, Atlantic Publishing Company, Florida, 2002.Burns, Marilyn & McCullough, Cathy, Business Savvy for Today’s New Entrepreneur, New Forums Press,Oklahoma, 2001.Garret, Taylor, J., Doing Business in the UK: Opportunities and Pitfalls, Chancery Law Publishing,London, 1995.Gustafson, Krystina, ‘It’s Not Armageddon for All Malls; Some are Turing Store Closures into Higherrents,’ CNBC (online), April 20, 2017.Luo, Yadong, Guanxi and Business, World Scientific Publishing, Singapore, 200.Salvaneschi, Luigi, Location, Location, Location: How to Select the Best Site for Your Business, EntrepreneurPress, Irvine (California), 2002.Chapter 8 (Finding a Manufacturer or Supplier)Attard, Jane, ‘Find Suppliers for Your Business’, Business Know How, www.businessknowhow.com,2006.Spiers, John, How Small Business Trades Worldwide, Writer’s Showcase (iUniverse Inc.), Lincoln(Nebraska), 2001.Strauss, Steven, The Business Start Up Kit, Dearborn Trade Publishing, 2003.Thomas Register of American Manufacturers, Thomas Register Publishing, 2004.201© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesswww.alibaba.comwww.census.gov/naicswww.yellowpages.comChapter 9 (Business Models)Ackerman, Raymond, Hearing Grasshoppers Jump, New Africa Books Ltd., Claremont, S.A., 2005.Hawken, Paul & Lovins, Amory & Lovins, L. Hunter, Natural Capitalism, Little, Brown and Company,Boston/New York, 1999.Mingo, Jack, How the Cadillac Got Its Fins, Harper Collins, NY, 1994.Scott, Jonathan, T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Simms, Jane, Do Mention the Money, Director, March 2006, pp.26.Taylor, Andrew, (Monthly Editorial), The Author, Spring, 2006, pp. 1.Womack, J.P., & Jones, D.T., Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your Corporation, Simon& Schuster, New York, 1996.Chapter 10 (13 Reasons Why Businesses Fail – and How to Prevent Them)Albrect, Karl & Zemke, Ron, Service America, Dow Jones Irwin, 1985.de Soto, Hernando, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the west and Fails EverywhereElse, Basic Books, New York, 2000.Emerson, John, ‘Consider the Collective: More Than Business as Usual’, Communication Arts InteractiveAnnual, September/October, 2005, pp. 5-7.Guy, Robert, ‘Top Ten Reasons Why Businesses Fail’, www.forum.belmont.ed/cornwall/archives/003452.html, 22 September 2005.Hagen, Jesse, ‘Top Reasons Why Businesses Fail’, Fox Cities SCORE Chapter, www.foxcitiesbusiness.com, 2001-2006.Jacobson, Gary & Hillkirk, John, Xerox: American Samurai, Collier Books, 1986.Johannisson, Bengt, ‘Entrepreneurship as a Collective Phenomenon’, Vaxjo University (Sweden), froma paper presented at RENT XII, Lyon, France, 26-27 November 1998.Rose, Frank, ‘Now Quality Means Service Too’, Fortune, 22 April 1991, pp. 97-108.Simms, Jane, ‘Do Mention the Money’, Director, March 2006, pp. 26.Wuorio, Jeff, ‘10 Reasons Why Business Fail’, Microsoft bCentral, www.bcentral.com, 2002.Chapter 11 (Writing the Best Business Plan)Bailey, Anthony, The Which Guide to Starting Your Own Business, Which Books (Penguin Ltd.), London,2003.Becket, Michael, The Daily Telegraph Small Business Guide to Starting Your Own Business, MacMillan,London, 2003.Green Jim, Starting Your Own Business, How to Books, Oxford, 2003.Wuorio, Jeff, ‘Plan a Business With Care’, www.microsoftbcentral.com/articles/bizplans, 25 September2002.Yandle, C. E., ‘How to Write a Business Plan’, www.microsftbcentral.com/articles/bizplans/101, 25September 2002.Chapter 12 (Finding Finance)Alarid, William, Free Help from Uncle Sam to Start Your Own Business, Puma Publishing, Santa Maria,California, 2000.202© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessBailey, Anthony, The Which Guide to Starting Your Own Business, Which Books (Penguin Ltd.), London,2003.Beckett, Michael, The Daily Telegraph Small Business Guide to Starting Your Own Business, Macmillan,London, 2003.Norman, Jan, What No One Ever Tells You About Starting Your Own Business, Upstart Publishing,Chicago, 1999.Scott, Jonathan, T., Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Chapter 13 (Bookkeeping, Numbers, Taxes, and Formulas)Bailey, Anthony, The Which Guide to Starting Your Own Business, Which Books (Penguin Ltd.), London,2003.Beckett, Michael, The Daily Telegraph Small Business Guide to Starting Your Own Business, Macmillan,London, 2003.Flannery, David A., Bookkeeping Made Simple, Broadway Books, NY, 2005.Mason, Roger, Bookkeeping and Accounting in a Week, Hodder Arnold, London, 2003.Norman, Jan, What No One Ever Tells You About Starting Your Own Business, Upstart Publishing,Chicago, 1999.Chapter 14 (Naming the Business or Product and Getting Started)Benun, Ilise, Designing Websites for Every Audience, How Design Books (F&W Publications), Cincinnati,Ohio, 2003.Berle, Gustav, The Do-It-Yourself Business Book, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.Berman, Ed, How to Set Up a Small Business, University of Cambridge Press, Cambridge (Australia),1987.Carter, David, The Big Book of Logos 4, Collins Design (Harper Collins), New York, 2005.Cash, Deborah, There’s No Office Like Home, Inc.com, www.inc.com, March 1998.Halliday, Stephen, Which Business (2nd Edition), Kogan Page, London, 1990.Longer, Sue & Mason, Richard, Planning and Designing Effective Websites, Course TechnologyPublications, Boston, 1998.Scase, Richard, & Goffee, Robert, The Real World of the Small Business Owner (2nd Edition), Crown Helm,1987.Chapter 15 (Making the Business Legal)Burns, Paul, & Dewhurst, Jim, Small Business in Europe, Macmillan, London, 1986.‘Business Structures’, (2006), www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/D,,id=98359,00.htmlPakroo, Peri H., The Small Business Start-Up Kit: A Step-by-Step Legal Guide, NOLO Publishing (4thedition), Berkeley, Cal, 2006.Dollinger, Marc, J., Entrepreneurship Strategies and Resources (3rd edition), Prentice Hall, Upper SaddleRiver, NJ, 2002.Lambing, Peggy & Kuehl, Charles, Entrepreneurship (2nd Edition), Prentice Hall, Upper saddle River, NJ,2000.Chapter 16 (Protecting the Business with Copyrights, Trademarks, Patents…)Charmasson, Henri, Patents, Copyrights and Trademarks for Dummies, Wiley Publishing, Hoboken (NJ),2004.Penn, Thomas, & Folz, Ramon, Handbook for protecting Ideas and Inventions, Penn Institute, 1992.www.uc-council.org www.uspto.gov203© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessChapter 17 (Re-Energizing)Lunn, Frank F., Stack the Logs: Building a Successful Framework to Build Your Dreams, Kahuna BusinessGroup, Illinois, 2004.Blair, G.M., Starting to Manage: The Essentials Skills, The Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers,Piscataway (New Jersey), 1996.Drucker, P.F., The Effective Executive, Harper & Row, New York, 1967.Griessman, B. E., Time Tactics of Very Successful People, McGraw-Hill, 1996.McCay, J.T., The Management of Time, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs (NJ), 1995.Webber, R.A. To Be a Manager, Irwin Press, Homewood (Illinois), 1981.Chapter 18 (Announcing the Existence of the Business)Egelhoff, Tom, The Small Town Advertising Handbook: How to Say More with and Spend Less, EagleMarketing, Bozeman (Montana), 2003.Farber, B., & Wycoff, J., Customer Service: Evolution and Revolution, Sales and Marketing Management,May 1991, pp. 47 - 52.Fenn, Donna, Alpha Dogs: How Your Small Business Can Become a Leader of the Pack, Harper Collins, NY,2005.Mizuno, Michelle, ‘Marketing Your Small Business – Advertising is Not an Expense’, Ezine Articles,http://ezinearticles.com/?id=195822, 2006Chapter 19 (A Front Line Promotion Checklist)Halloran, J.W., The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Starting a Successful Business (2nd edition), McGraw-Hill, NewYork, 1992.John, Leslie K., Emrich, Oliver, Schwartz, Janet, ‘What’s the Value of a Like?’, Harvard Business Review,March-April 2017, pp-108-115.Schwartz, D.J., Marketing Today: A Basic Approach (3rd edition), Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York,1981.Scott, Jonathan, T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Scott, Jonathan T., ‘Effective Marketing’, Recreation Magazine, March-April 1996, pp. 5-6.Scott, Jonathan T., ‘Good Customer Care’, Hospitality, August-September 1996, p. 15.Tomkinson, L., ‘Tips for Improving Retail Sales’, Update, July-August 1997, pp. 5-8.Chapter 20 (Developing Internal and External Customers)McGregor, D., The Human Side of Management, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.Meyer, H.H., ‘A Solution to the Performance Appraisal Feedback Enigma’, The Executive, Feb 1991, pp.68-72.Scott, J. T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Scott, J. T., Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Ziglar, Zig, Top Performance, Fleming H. Revell Publishing, New Jersey, 1986.Wren, D.A., The Evolution of Management Thought (4th edition), John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.Chapter 21 (Management)Handy, Charles, Understanding the Organization, Penguin Books Ltd., London, 1993.Johannisson, Bengt, ‘Entrepreneurship as a Collective Phenomenon’, Vaxjo University (Sweden), froma paper presented at RENT XII, Lyon, France, 26-27 November 1998.Katz, R.L., ‘Skills of an Effective Administrator’, Harvard Business Review, Sept.-Oct. 1974, pp. 90-94.Kennedy, Dan S., How To Succeed in Business by Breaking All the Rules, Dutton (Penguin), NY, 1997.204© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessLorenz, Kate, Desperate Co-Workers; True Tales of Office Animosity, www.careerbuilder.com/Custom/MSN/CareerAdvice, 21 March 2005.Luthens, F., & Kreitner, R., Organizational Behavior Modification, Scott- Foresman, Glenview (Illinois),1975.Matteson, M.T., ‘Some Reported Thoughts on Significant Management Literature’, Academy ofManagement, June 1974, pp. 386-391.Pascale, R. T., Managing on the Edge, Penguin Books, New York, 1991.Scott, Jonathan, T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Sirota, David & Mischkind, Louise A. & Meltzer, Irwin, The Enthusiastic Employee: How Companies Profitby Giving Workers What They Want, Wharton School Publishing (Pearson Education, NJ), 2005.Wren, D.A., The Evolution of Management Thought, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994.Chapter 22 (Understanding the Importance of Customers)Ackerman, Raymond, The Four Legs of the Table, David Philip Publishers, Claremont (SA), 2005.Dehart, Jason, ‘Flying Private’, 850 Magazine, April-May 2017, pp 22-29.Hart, Stuart, Capitalism at the Crossroads, Wharton School Publishing (Pearson Education), NewJersey, 2005.Kanter, R.M., Transcending Business Boundaries,’ Harvard Business Review, May-June 1991, pp.151-154.Leonard, S., ‘Love That Customer,’ Management Review, October 1987, pp. 36-39.Lorinc, J., ‘Now the Customer is Job 1,’ Canadian Business, July 1997, pp. 22-28.‘A Matter of Priorities,’ The New York Times, 19 February 1995, section F, pp.23.Oakland, J., Total Quality Management, Butterworth-Heinemann, New York, 1993.Scott, J. T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Scott, J. T., Fundamental of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Chapter 23 (The Basic Elements Behind Every Product)Fenn Donna, Alpha Dogs: How Your Small Business Can Become a Leader of the Pack, Harper Collins, NY,2005.Kotler, P. & Armstrong, G. & Saunders, J. & Wong, V., Principles of Marketing (2nd European Edition),Prentice Hall Europe, London, 1999.Murphy, P.E., & Enis, B.M., ‘Classifying Products Strategically’, Journal of Marketing, July 1986, pp. 24- 30.Scott, J. T., Fundamental of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Chapter 24 (The Importance of Marketing)Bennet, P.D., Dictionary of Marketing Terms, American Marketing Association, Chicago, 1988.Farber, B., & Wycoff, J., Customer Service: Evolution and Revolution, Sales and Marketing Mgmt, May1991, pp. 47 - 52.Kirby, Keith, ‘Digital is Dead’, LinkedIn, April 22, 2016.Kotler, P. & Armstrong, G. & Saunders, J. & Wong, V., Principles of Marketing (2nd European Edition),Prentice Hall Europe, London, 1999.Miller, Nancy & McLeod, Harriet &Oh, Keun Young, ‘Managing Family Businesses in SmallCommunities’, Journal of Small Business Management, vol39 (1), 2001, pp.73-87.Scott, J.T., Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Chapter 25 (Competitive Advantage Strategy)205© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessCoyne, K.P., ‘Sustainable Competitive Advantage: What it is, What it Isn’t’, Business Horizons (29), no.1, Jan-Feb 1986, pp. 54 - 59.Foster, Richard & Kaplan, Sarah, Creative Destruction, Doubleday, New York, 2001.Porter, M.E., Competitive Advantage, Free Press, New York, 1985.Thompson, A. A., & Strickland, A.J., Strategic Management (7th edition), Richard Irwin, Inc., Boston,1993.Chapter 26 (Quality)‘Benchmarkers Make Strange Bedfellows’, Industry Week, Nov 15, 1993, pp. 8-9.Deming, W.E., Out of the Crisis, The W. Edwards Deming Institute & The MIT Center for AdvancedEngineering, Massachusetts, 1986.Garvin, D.A., ‘Competing on the 8 Dimensions of Quality,’ Harvard Business Review, vol. 65, no. 6,1987, pp. 101-109.Lawler, E.E., & Mohrman, S.A., ‘Quality Circles After the Fad’, Harvard Business Review, Jan-Feb 1985,pp. 16-18.Main, J., ‘How to Steal the Best Ideas Around’, Fortune, Oct 19, 1992, pp. 102 - 103.Sashkin, M., & Kiser, K.J., Putting Total Quality Management to Work, Berret-Koehlor, San Francisco,1993.Chapter 27 (Pricing)Cateora, P.R., International Marketing (7th edition), Irwin Press, Homewood (Illinois), 1990.Nagle, T.T., & Holden, R. K., The Strategy and Tactics of Pricing (2nd ed.), Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs(NJ), 1995.Scott, J.T., Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Schwartz, D.J., Marketing Today: A Basic Approach (3rd edition), Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York,1981.Chapter 28 & 29 (Selling & Closing a Sale)Dembo, Mark, ‘Buying Signals: Is Your Prospect Ready to Buy?’, www.sideroad.com/sales, December2005.Green Jim, Starting Your Own Business, How to Books, Oxford, UK. 2002.Hoover, John & Sparkman, Bill, How to Sell to an Idiot, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken (New Jersey),2006Lustberg, Arch, How to Sell Yourself, Career Press, Franklin Lakes (New Jersey), 2002.Parinello, Tony, Stop Cold Calling Forever, McGraw Hill, 2004.Parinello, Tony, ‘Turning a Prospect’s No into a Yes’, www.entrepreneur.com/article/o,4621,309855,00.html,14 July, 2003.Ziglar, Zig, Selling 101, Thomas Nelson Inc., Nashville, 2003.Chapter 30 (Getting the Most from Employees)Alderfer, C.P., Existence, Relatedness and Growth, Free Press, New York, 1992.Barclay, Liz, Small Business Employment Law for Dummies, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2002.Carnegie, Dale, How to Win Friends and Influence People, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1939Caudron, S., ‘Delegate for Results’, Industry Week, Feb. 6, 1995, pp. 27-29.Herzberg, F., ‘One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 47,Jan-Feb 1968, pp. 53-57.206© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessLewicki, R.J., & Bowen, D.D., & Hall, D.T. & Hall, F.S., Experiences in Management and OrganizationalBehavior (3rd Edition), John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988.Maslow, A.H., Motivation and Personality (2nd edition), Harper & Row, New York, 1970.McClelland, D.C., The Achieving Society, Van Nostrand, New York, 1961.Robbins, S.P. & Hunsaker, P.L., Training in Interpersonal Skills (2nd Edition), Prentice Hall, Saddle River,NJ, 1996.Semler, R., Maverick, Warner Books, New York, 1995.Scott, Jonathan, T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Scott, J.T., Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success, Haworth Press, New York, 1998.Semler, Ricardo, Maverick: the Success Story Behind the World’s Most Unusual Workplace, Warner Books,NY, 1995.Whetton, D.A., & Cameron, K.S., Developing Management Skills (3rd Edition), Harper Collins, New York,1991.Chapter 31 (Ethics and Social Responsibility)Ackerman, Raymond, The Four Legs of the Table, David Philip Publishers, Claremont, South Africa,2005.Friedman, Milton, ‘The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Its Profits’, The New York TimesMagazine, 13 September 1970, 32-33, pp. 122-126.Gellerman, S.W., ‘Why Good Managers Make Bad Ethical Choices’, Harvard Business Review, vol. 64,July-Aug 1986, pp. 85-90.Gray, Patricia & Field, Anne, Can Entrepreneurship be Taught?, Fortune Small Business (CNN Money.com), http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fsb/fsb_archive/2006/03/01/8370301/index.htm, 1 March,2006.From the Government Accountability Project as reported in ‘Blowing the Whistle Without Paying thePiper’, Business Week, June 3, 1991, pg. 138-140.Nash, L.L., ‘Ethics Without the Sermon’, Harvard Business Review, Nov-Dec 1981, pp. 81-84.Otten, A.L., ‘Ethics on the Job’, The Wall Street Journal, July 14, 1986, pp. 17.Scott, Jonathan, T., The Concise Handbook of Management, Haworth Press, New York, 2005.Webley, Simon & More, Elise, ‘Does Business Ethics Pay?’, The Institute of Business Ethics, www.ibe.org.uk, April 2003.www.gdi.ch (the Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute website)Chapter 32 (Cooperative Networking)Adler, Lee, ‘Symbiotic Marketing’, Harvard Business Review, November-December 1966, pp. 59-71.Batson, Daniel, ‘How Social an Animal: The Human Capacity for Caring’, American Psychologist, April1990, vol. 45, pp. 336-346.Doz, Yves & Hamel, Gary & Prahalad, ‘Collaborate With Your Competitors and Win’, Harvard BusinessReview, January-February 1986, pp.133-139.Gerlach, Michael L., ‘Alliance Capitalism: The Social Organization of Japanese Business’, University ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley, California, 1992.Larson, Andrea, ‘Network Dyads in Entrepreneurial Settings: A Study of the Governance of ExchangePrograms’, Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 37 (1992), pp. 76-104.Lotti, Riccardo & Mensing, Peter & Valenti, David, ‘A Cooperative Solution’, Strategy + Business, www.strategy-business.com, July 17 2006.McGrath, Alan, ‘Collaborative Marketing Comes of Age’, Sales and Marketing Management, September207© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Business1991, pp. 61-61.Smitka, Michael, ‘Competitive Ties: Subcontracting in Japanese Automotive Industry’, Columbia Univ.Press, NY, 1991.Thierren, Lois, ‘Café au Lait, a Croissant and Trix’, Business Week, August 24 1992, pp. 50-51.Tremblay, Diane-Gabrielle, ‘Industrial Districts and Innovative Networks: New Theories and Conceptsfor Entrepreneurship Development’, published by: Tele-Universite, Universite du Quebec, P.O. Box670, Station C, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (no date given).Chapter 33 (Manufacturing New Products – and Selling Them)Armstrong, G. & Kotler, P. & Saunders, J. & Wong, V., Principles of Marketing, Prentice Hall, London,1999.Czinkota, Michael & Kotabe, Masaaki, ‘Product Development the Japanese Way’, Journal of BusinessStrategy, November-December 1990, pp. 31-36.Koenig, Daniel, ‘Introducing New Products’, Mechanical Engineering, www.memagazine.org, August1997.Reese, Jennifer, ‘Getting Hot Ideas From Customers’, Fortune, 18 May 1992, pp. 86-87.Waters, Shari, ‘Top 3 Ways to Beat the Competition’, Your Guide to Retailing (About Retailing), www.retail.about.com, September 2006.Chapter 34 (Expanding into Foreign Markets)Inside the Minds editors, The International Executive: Rules for Doing Business Overseas, AspatoreBooks, March 2003.Jackson, Jonathan, ‘Preparing Your Business for Export’, Wealth Creator Magazine, Sept/Oct 2006,pp. 35-39.‘Preparing to Sell Overseas’, (no author given), www.10.americanexpress.com, September 19, 2006.Slettern, Eric, How to Succeed in Doing Business Internationally, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1994.Wise, Betsy, ‘Doing Business at Home and Overseas’, Ingage (www.ingagementors.com), August 22,2006.www.cbsa.gc.ca/general/publications/hcdcs-e.htmlwww.census.govwww.fita.orgwww.trade.govChapter 35 (Sustainability: The New Frontier)Associated Press (and CBS News), ‘Probe: Pharmaceuticals in Drinking Water’, www.cbsnews.com,March 10, 2008Begley, Sharon, ‘Global Warming Deniers: A Well Funded Machine,’ Newsweek, August 13, 2007.Carlson, Ann, ‘Heat Waves, Global Warming & Mitigation’, Issues in Legal Scholarship, May 2006.Fox-Skelly, Jasmin, ‘There are Diseases Hidden in the Ice and They are Waking Up’, BBC (Earth) online,May 4 2017.Friedman, Thomas L., The World is Flat, Penguin Books Ltd., London, 2006.Frosch, Robert, ‘Closing the Loop on Waste Materials’, The Industrial Green Game, Nat’l Acad. Press,1997, pp. 37-47.Geissdoefer, Martin, Savaget, Paulo, Bocken, Nancy, Hultink, Eric, ‘The Circular Economy – A NewsSustainability Paradigm?’, Journal of Cleaner Production, Elsevier Ltd, December 21 2016, pp 757-768.Guerrera, Francesco, ‘Warren Buffeted by His Critics but Wins the Day,’ Financial Times, Section B, pg.19, May 7, 2007.208© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgBibliography — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessHart, Stuart, Capitalism at the Crossroads, Wharton School Publishing, 2005.Harvey, F, & Bounds, A., ‘Regulatory Regime Put to Test at Borders’, Financial Times, Section A, pg 3,February 7, 2007.Hawkin, Paul & Lovins, Amory & Hunter, Lovins, Natural Capital, Little Brown and Company, Boston,1999.Johns Hopkins University, ‘Prescription Drug Pollution May Harm Humans and Aquatic Life’, ScienceDaily, www.sciencedaily.com, April 11, 2002.Kamrin, Michael, Traces of Environmental Chemicals in the Human Body, (prepared for) The AmericanCouncil on Science and Health, May 2003.Knobluach, Jessica, ‘Have It Your (sustainable) Way’, EJ Magazine (University of Michigan), pp.28-30,Spring 2007.Pappas, Stephanie, ‘5 Deadly, Diseases Emerging from Global Warming’, LiveScience (online), Aug 3,2016.Vencat, Emily Flynn, ‘Climate Change and the Economy’, Newsweek International, www.msnbc.msn.com, April 16, 2007.Walsh, Bryan, ‘Global Warming’s Next Victim: Wheat’, Time Magazine, www.time.com, August 27,2007.Zandonella, Catherine, ‘Airborne Toxins’, National Geographic, www.thegreenguide.com, July/August2005.Chapter 36 (Putting It All Together)Bisoux, Tricia, ‘Playing by the Rules’, BizEd, Summer/October 2005, pp. 19-25.Nichols, Tom, The Death of Expertise, Oxford University Press, UK, 2017.209© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAckerman, Raymond, 54, 125Advertising, 99, 132Age, 13Alderfer, Clayton, 159Ali Baba, 51Allen, Woody, 152Apple Computer, 13, 14, 22, 57Arpi Holding 42Arthur Anderson, 168ASAP UK Ltd, 59Auchan, 54Audit, 78Avon Cosmetics, 24Bacon, Francis, 77Balance sheets, 78Banks, 73-74Bar codes, 93-94Baylis, Trevor, 24Behavior modification, 165-166Benchmarking, 142Berry, Wendell, 186Better Business Bureau, 51Better Payment Practice Group, 51, 60Billings, Josh, 181Blank, Arthur, 14Blue jeans, 24Body Shop, 5, 14Boeing Aircraft Company, 22, 56Boeing, Bill, 22Bond, John, 14Bookkeeping, 77-81Borden Foods, 24Borden, Gail, 24Bowerman, Bill, 13Break-even, 79Brink, David, 149British Airways, 128Brown, George W, 25Browning-Ferris, 24Brill, Ronald, 14Burns, George, 150Index210© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessBusiness angels, 15Business incubators, 47Business models, 53-58Business networks, 173-176Business plans, 67-72Buster Brown Shoes, 25Buying a business, 30Buying signals, 155Campbell, Cathy, 22Cape Town Boat Builder’s Initiative, 27Capital, 63Carlson, Chester, 59Carnegie, Dale, 158Carrefour, 54Carroll, Lewis, 86Case Western University, 15Casey, Jim, 13Cash flow problems, 60Chick-a-Chick, 20Citicorp, 57Citroen, 55City centers, 46Classification of Products by Activity, 50, 182Clean Air Acts, 190Climate change, 186Closing a sale, 154-157Coca-Cola, 56,173Coles, 54Comer, Gary, 23Contacto pyME, 64Cooperative networking, 173-176Copyright, 91Corporate venturing, 74Cosby, Bill, 136Cost of goods sold, 79Cultural arrogance, 184Customers, 61, 108-112, 120, 150, 151, 155, 169database, 102dealing with difficult…, 117relationships, 114service, 114, 116211© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful Businesswants, 116Daniels, Josephus, 154De Architectura, 194Delegation, 160-162Dell Computer, 13, 14, 22, 55, 64Dell, Michael, 13,14Deming, W. Edwards, 140Desert Knowledge Australia, 174Dewey, John, 29Difficult customers, 124-125Digital, 134Disney, 13, 20Disney, Walt, 23Distributers, 49-52Domino’s Pizza, 13, 25, 64Dow Chemical, 14Dow Jones Industrial Average, 20Druckerman, Amanda, 17Dun & Bradstreet, 50, 51, 60DuPont, 167Duttweiler, Gottlieb, 22, 167, 168E-networking (emails, social media), 101, 102, 105, 106Edgerton, Harold, 14Edison, Thomas, 22, 131EG&G, 23Employee(s), 108-112evaluations, 111motivating…, 158-165reprimands/punishment, 164theft, 166Empowerment, 162-164Enron, 168Entrepreneurship myths, 15Environment, 186-187Ethics, 169, 169-170, 186-193Equation Business Solutions, 22Equipment loans, 74Euromarche, 54Facebook, 101, 105, 106Failure (why businesses fail), 59-65212© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessFaith Mountain Company, 25Fantasia, 23Fatjo, Tom, 24FBO (Fixed Base Operator), pp 123-124Fear (of starting a business), 12-13Feedback, 164First Contact Entrepreneurial Advisory Centre, 64Fomina, Olga, 26Ford, Henry, 12Foreign markets, 181-185Foundation for Research and Teaching of the Entrepreneurial Spirit, 64Franchising, 31, 183Fremont Canning Company, 26Friedman, Milton, 167Fromm, Erich, 97Full-time businesses, 30Gandhi, Indira, 91Gandhi, Mahatma, 123Gates, Bill, 13Gateway 2000, 14Geisel, Theodore, 95General Electric, 23, 59, 186, 160General Mills, 173Gerber, Daniel, 26Gibran, Kahlil, 43Gillette, King C. , 14Global warming, 187Gordon, David, 24Grand openings, 101Grants, 75Grameen Bank, 57Grameen Telecom, 26Green, Jim, 151Haagen-Dazs, 23Hall, Joyce C. , 13Hallmark, 13Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, 182Harvard University, 106Herzberg, Frederick, 159Hewlett-Packard, 13, 20, 23Hewlett, Bill, 13213© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessHill, Napoleon, 126Hilton, Conrad, 11Hirsch, Leon, 23Holiday Inn, 23Home Depot, 14HSBC, 14IBM, 57-59Ideas (finding business ideas), 26, 27, 123In-house, marketing, 103-104Incorporation, 88Industrial parks, 47Institute of Business Ethics, 167International Finance Corporation, 20Interviews (telephone and group), 37-38Instagram, 101, 105Inventory, 80Insurance, 85Jimmy Bradley’s Irish Pub, 168Jobs, Stephen, 14Johnson, Joe, 23Jong, Erica, 194K7 Communications, 174Kaiser Supermarkets,Kauffman, Ewing, 14Kelly, Walt, 167Kennedy, Dan S. , 18Kennedy, John F. , 11Kentucky Fried Chicken, 13, 23Kirby, Keith, 134Knight, Phil, 13Kodak, 59Kroc, Ray, 13, 56Land, Edwin, 22Lands’ End, 23Lean thinking, 55Ledger books, 80Leases, 47Legal structures, 86Leopold, Ian, 14Limited liability company (Ltd), 88214© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessLincoln, Abraham, 114Lippman, Walter, 120Lloyd’s of London, 187Loans, 75Locations (choosing the best), 45-48Logos, 75MacDonald’s, 13, 29, 56, 142Management, 114-119styles, 117two choices of, 115Managing the New Frontiers, 189Manufacturers, 39-42Marcus, Bernard, 14Marche, Bernard, 20Market research, 34-29Marketing, 131-135mix, 131out-of-house, 104-106overseas, 184-185Marks & Spencers, 54Marriott (hotels), 13Maslow, Abraham (hierarchy of needs), 158Mattel (toy company), 13Mattus, Rueben, 23Maxi-Service Auto, 49MBWA, 117McClelland, David, 158McConnell, David, 24Media kit, 99Microsoft, 13, 20, 22Migros, 165, 168Miller, Henry, 40Million Air Tallahassee, pp 123-124MIT, 23MJM International, 39, 95Mohican stores, 54Monaghan, Tom, 13Mone, Michelle, 39, 95Munsey, Frank, 54Naming a business (or product), 82-83215© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — © The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessNestle, 173Nike, 13North American Industrial Classification System, 50, 179Northwest Prototypes Ltd, 29Office Depot, 128Options (types of business options) 29-22Overheads, 33Overworking, 96Packard, Dave, 23Pamir Production Services, 29Parinello, Tony, 154Part-time businesses, 30Partnerships, 87Pasteur, Louis, 67Patents, 85-86Personal selling, 132Pet Butler, 26Peugot, 55Pick-n-Pay, 54, 168Piggly Wiggly, 54Pink Taxi, 26Pinterest, 101, 105Pitney Bowes, 56Poland, Polish universities, 40Polaroid, 22Pollio, Marcus, Vitius, 194Practical Paradigms, 128Press kit, 99Press releases, 101Pret a la Creation d‘Enterprise, 64Pricing, 63, 144-148Primary data, 35, 26Procontra P/L, 73Proctor & Gamble, 136Products, 126-130choosing to sell, 178classifying, 182increasing the life of, 133lifecycle, 133manufacturing new, 177216© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessProduct-Life Institute, 192Profit, 80Promotions, 132PTI International, 54Public relations, 100-101, 132Pujals, Leopoldo, 25Quadir, Iqbal, 26Quality, 140-1438 dimensions of, 141Questionnaires, 37Reasons for starting a business, 19Remspecreserve, 169Reprimands (employee), 164Research, 33-39external, 40-42internal, 42-43ReTuna Återbruksgalleria, 25Rocky Horror Picture Show, 129Roddick, Anita, 14, 24Rogers, Will, 194SA Batidecor, 51Sainsbury’s, 54Sales tax, 81Sallust, 173Sarnoff, Robert, 73Schick, 173Schweitzer, Albert, 114Schindler Elevator, 56Secondary data, 35-36Securities and Exchange Commission, 1Seidemann, William, 23Seiko (watch company), 173Selling, 149-153, 154-157in foreign markets, 181-185Semco, 162Semler, Ricardo, 162Service, 56, 123-125, 128Service Corps of Retired Executives, 54Shane, Scott, 5Sheehy, Gail, 177217© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex —© The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessShopping centers, 46Signs, 78Simon, Ted, 82Small Business Administration, 35, 64, 75, 77Small Business Development Centers, 35, 64, 75, 77Snap-On Tools, 23Social media, 101,105-106,134Social responsibility, 167-168, 206Sole proprietorship, 86Sole trader, 86Solvit Centres, 64Staffing problems, 61Stahel, Walter, 56Standard & Poor Index, 137Starbuck’s, 26Steidel, Robert, 82Stern, Nicholas (Sir), 189Strategy (business), 138-139push versus pull, 178Strauss, Levi, 24Stress, 96-7Sweden recycling shopping mall, 25Subchapter S corporation, 89Success (defining), 12SWOT analysis, 43TAOM, 64Taxes, 63,80Telepizza, 25Ten Commandments of Business Strategy, 138Ten Commandments of Business Success, 123Tesco, 54Theft, (employee), 142, 166Thomas, Dave, 23Thurman, Howard, 45Time management, 95, 119h (How small business managers spend their time)Todd, Mike, 21Total quality management, 141Toro (lawnmower company), 167Toyota, 55Trade credit, 75, 76218© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgIndex — The Entrepreneur’s Guide to Building a Successful BusinessTrademarks, 31, 32, 83, 91, 92, 93, 183, 202Training and Enterprise Council, 64Triangulation, 39Trujillo, Bernardo, 53Tusk, Donald, 40Twitter, 101, 102, 105UltraForce Group, 35Ultimo lingerie, 39United States Surgical Corporation, 23UPC number, 93UPS, 13Value added tax (VAT), 81Venture capitalists, 15, 75W H Smith, 54Waitt, Ted, 14Wal-Mart, 54, 128Walters, Louis, 24Waterstones, 54Websites, 83Wendy’s, 23Windsave (turbines), 24Wilson, Joe, 59Wilson Kemmons, 23Windsor, Simon, 35Woodward, Cheri, 25World Bank, 20World Health Organization, 188Worldcom, 60Wozniak, Stephen, 14Wright, Wilbur, 17X-Pak S.A., 34Xerox, 56Yellow Pages, 22Yunus, Mohammad, 26, 57-58219© Jonathan T. Scott and EFMD www.efmd.orgAbout the AuthorJonathan T. Scott is a lecturer, entrepreneur, and manager with over 28 years of business andteaching experience in 17 different countries. As a manager and business leader he has beenrecognized for tripling productivity, reducing business operation costs up to 40%, and increasing netprofits over 55%, as well as orchestrating three successive business turn-arounds over a ten-yearperiod.Currently, he is the director of The Center for Industrial Productivity and Sustainability (CIPS), anon-profit based organization that creates and distributes free business education and trainingmaterials designed to enable sustainable economic growth by empowering individuals. Examples oforganizations that use his materials include: EFMD, the United Nations (UNFPA and WHO), USCommercial Service, the Abu Dhabi Chamber of Commerce, Makro, the Yueda Group, the Ras Al KhaimahWaste Management Authority, and ECR Polska.Apart from his non-profit work, Scott develops front-line training programs for businesses andindustrial zones in Europe, Asia and the Middle East. Additionally, he administers seminars andworkshops for business organizations (e.g.: chambers of commerce) and designs and teaches academicprograms for business schools. He is currently a foreign faculty member at the EADA School ofManagement (Barcelona, Spain) and has taught at the Rotterdam School of Management; ErasmusUniversity (the Netherlands); the Audencia Nantes School of Management (Nantes, France); BradfordUniversity, (Bradford, UK); the Lorange Institute (Zurich, Switzerland); the University of Perugia (Perugia,Italy); the Yancheng Institute of Technology (China); and other renowned institutes.Scott holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Florida State University (Tallahassee), an MBA (inmanagement) from Western International University (at its former London, UK campus), a CELTAteaching certification from Oxford Brookes University (Oxford, UK), and an MA (in management) fromKozminski University (Warsaw, Poland) During his studies, he also attended a two-year exchangeprogram at the Universite de Bourgogne (Dijon, France).His business and management books include: Fundamentals of Leisure Business Success (1998), TheConcise Handbook of Management (2005), Managing the New Frontiers (2008), The SustainableBusiness (2015), which has been translated into Traditional Chinese, Arabic, Simplified Chinese, andPolish, and The Sustainable Business Workbook series (the first workbook lays out the application ofwaste elimination; the second workbook enables resource-life extension practices to be introducedinto any business). Both workbooks are available in English, Traditional Chinese and SimplifiedChinese.To download and share the free ‘The Sustainable Business’ portfolio of videos, workbooks, syllabusexamples and additional education and training materials, visit: www.cipsfoundation.comTo enable sustainable, wide-spread business creation and development by empowering individualsin your region or country, contact: jtscott@cipsfoundation.comAbout the AuthorDesign by www.jebensdesign.co.ukEverything you need to build your successful business:• Finding a profitable business idea• Choosing a location• Writing a business plan• Business model examples• Determining costs and revenues• Avoiding the 13 common reasons why businesses fail• Locating finance• Basic Bookkeeping• Pricing• Marketing and promotion (in-house and external)• Customer attraction and retention• How to sell (and how to close a sale)• Beating competitors that are bigger and have more money than your business• Finding and managing good employees• Taking your business to the next level...and much, much more.EFMD is an international, not-for-profit, membership organisation, basedin Brussels, Belgium. With nearly 900 member organisations from academia,business, public service and consultancy in 86 countries,EFMD provides a unique forum for information, research, networkingand debate on innovation and best practice in management development.For more information visit www.efmd.org